healthcare professionals in related fields. In this context, ESPEN vows to promote and seek cooperation for enhancement of clinical nutrition awareness and education in primary care, with implementation of relevant best practices to promote health and prevent identify and treat aging- and disease-related malnutrition, according to best available clinical practice.

# 2. Current perspective of clinical nutrition in primary care

PCHPs are predominantly the first-contact physicians for most patients. They are the gatekeepers of healthcare systems, with the very demanding task of organizing and supervising a vast array of procedures. These include general health promotion with an important role for prevention, early detection as well as treatment of a wide variety of acute and chronic diseases in virtually all fields of medicine. At the same time, PCHPs are expected to nurture trusting long-term relationships with their patients, bearing in mind their psychological and social environment. In this context, the primary care setting plays a major potential role in the early identification of unhealthy lifestyle patterns, which include nutrition habits and their modification towards a healthier nutritional state. Importantly, ESPEN and WHO-Europe recently proposed the principle that prevention of NCDs at the level of primary healthcare should also ideally encompass secondary prevention and monitoring of altered nutritional state, with particular regard to DRM [24].

Although it seems reasonable to presume that PCHPs play a central role in important parts of the nutritional care process, such as screening for nutritional derangements including malnutrition, as well as provision of general nutrition counselling, studies and experience have shown that such role is largely missing in daily practice [25,26]. Although this gap has been long recognized, with studies showing a varying degree of awareness of the importance of nutrition among PCHPs [27], little progress seems to occur in routine implementation. This can be attributed to several reasons. Firstly, PCHPs have self-perceived lack of skills in providing nutrition counselling [28-30] which may be due, among other reasons, to insufficient nutrition education in medical schools [28-30]. In addition, community dietetic services are not available to support nutritional monitoring and potentially nutrition prescription [28,30,31] in many countries. Indeed, education in nutrition is still not sufficiently delivered in most medical schools [32-34], and when it is, it is mostly delivered during preclinical years [33], resulting in insufficient nutritional knowledge in virtually almost all medical specialists [35]. As a potentially related consequence, PCHPs appear to be reluctant to address nutritional issues and to modify any nutrition treatments prescribed during hospitalization after hospital discharge, also due to perceived lack of clarity in nutritional care plans [31].

Furthermore, low availability of nutritional care in the primary care setting can be also attributed to lack of time and financial incentive [30]. In most countries, the number of PCHPs is low for any given number of patients, and their workload is increasing with increasing number of patient visits and higher complexity [36,37]. Although time spent on each visit is reported to increase over the years, so does the number of medical issues that need to be addressed, resulting in less time dedicated to each topic [38]. Barriers at the practice level are also interrelated with insufficient health system support. Challenges at health system level, among others, include (i) insufficient structural support across the domains of organization, finance and information; (ii) lack of prioritization on the development of supportive resources, training programmes and practical tools for health service providers; (iii) lack of workforce strategies on the expansion of primary care multidisciplinary teams, and alignment of team composition and competences to the needs related to screening and diagnosis of

malnutrition; (iv) insufficient establishment of referral pathways. For instance, availability of healthcare professionals qualified to collaborate with PCHPs to perform nutritional screening and provide initial guidance could help establish a network to enhance priority of nutrition and nutritional care in primary care. However, such specialized workforce is not readily available. Nurses are for instance reported to lack time to systematically perform nutritional screening [39]. While availability of registered dietitians in primary care varies per country, in most countries they are usually employed only at secondary and tertiary care levels, and are therefore often unavailable to primary care [31].

# 3. The ESPEN experience

For the reasons discussed above, in recent years ESPEN has increasingly promoted the concept of enhanced implementation of nutritional care in primary care. A global survey launched by ESPEN in 2020 among representatives from 33 national clinical nutrition Societies represented in the ESPEN Council has clearly shown existing limitations, as well as the potential for including PCHPs in the field of clinical nutrition. Most of the national Societies for clinical nutrition that are affiliated to ESPEN have a low percentage of PCHP members (average  $10\%$ ), with few exceptions (e.g. Germany, Colombia, Ecuador and Chile). Despite such low average number of PCHP members, half of the ESPEN national Societies that participated in the survey have institutional and professional relationship, or some kind of collaboration with national Societies for Primary Care or related organizations. About  $60\%$  of national Societies in ESPEN provide educational material and/or organize educational events for PCHPs, at times in cooperation with relevant societies in the field. Such initiatives reflect and highlight a potential willingness of Primary Care Societies to increase priority and be involved in nutritional care issues in clinical practice.

With regard to the involvement of PCHPs in nutritional screening for malnutrition and-or nutritional consultations, results from the ESPEN survey showed substantial room for improvement. In  $60\%$  of participating cCountries, PCHPs are only rarely or never engaged in patient nutritional screening. Nutritional consultations of any kind are provided by PCHPs in less than half of the countries  $(46\%)$ . According to the ESPEN survey, PCHPs are only involved in patient nutritional follow up after hospital discharge either "sometimes"  $(40\%)$  or "rarely"  $(37.5\%)$ . For patients in need of home nutrition and-or provision of home artificial nutrition,  $62.5\%$  of participating cCountry representatives reported that PCHPs are not involved in home nutritional care. Among countries  $(58\%)$  where home enteral nutrition is reimbursed, PCHPs do not initiate its prescription. In general, results of the ESPEN survey on nutritional care in PC underscore largely insufficient implementation, and they indicate lack of empowerment of PCHPs in this fundamental task.

# 4. Empowering primary healthcare to deliver nutritional care

ESPEN wishes to promote the concept that more active involvement of PCHPs in nutritional care has strong potential to benefit the patients by preventing derangements of nutritional state or allowing for their early treatment, not only in the field of over-nutrition and obesity, but even more in prevention and treatment of aging- and disease-related malnutrition. To this aim, we further maintain that a clear roadmap is urgently needed. A strategy for empowering PCHPs in the field of clinical nutrition should encompass the development of different settings for education, as well as practical actions. In general, in the middle-to long-term nutrition education should be promoted to become a mandatory part of medical curriculum in universities, as well as part of medical training in postgraduate programmes in virtually all medical specialties and

disciplines. In this context, we can expect future physicians to have higher awareness for clinical nutrition and nutritional care including malnutrition.

The nutritional care process involves the steps of SCREENING and DIAGNOSING malnutrition, particularly in all individuals presenting with malnutrition risk factors such as older age, chronic disease, post-acute disease conditions and after hospitalization for any cause. In patients with malnutrition risk of full-blown malnutrition, full nutritional ASSESSMENT and thereafter appropriate TREATMENT and MONITORING should be implemented according to best available clinical practice. In the process of health promotion through prevention and treatment of aging- and disease-related malnutrition, screening and diagnosis of malnutrition should be fully available and implementable by PCHPs as first step of the nutritional care process.

# 4.1. Primary care physician office

SCREENING: nutritional screening aims at identifying the risk of malnutrition and therefore represents the first step of the nutritional care pathway, allowing for early detection and potential early treatment of patients at nutritional risk [40]. Screening tools are designed to be simple and mostly based on simple clinical questions, making them inherently suitable for use also in primary care. Evidence suggests that the screening tool MUST (Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool) [41,42] may be appropriate and reliable in outpatient settings, thereby including nutrition screening at the primary healthcare level. The Nutrition Risk Screening-2002 tool (NRS-2002) [42,43] has been conversely established to be most appropriate at the secondary and tertiary level of health system [44], including the hospital setting. Even in the recent scenario of global pandemic conditions, with limited availability of healthcare services, remote nutritional screening has been proposed through algorithms based on established screening tools such as R-MAPP [45].

DIAGNOSIS: Global consensus-based diagnostic criteria for malnutrition have been recently proposed by the GLIM working group, representing all global clinical nutrition Societies [4]. The GLIM criteria notably aim at simplicity for potential implementation in all clinical setting including primary care [4,46]. The GLIM construct includes phenotypic and etiological criteria [4]. Phenotypic criteria are non-volitional weight loss, low body mass index, and reduced skeletal muscle mass, while etiologic criteria are reduced food intake/assimilation and the presence of inflammation/disease burden [4]. To diagnose malnutrition, at least one phenotypic and one etiologic criterion must be met [4]. The GLIM approach aims at simplicity and flexibility of malnutrition diagnosis, which should be available also to non-nutrition healthcare personnel. Anthropometric measures are universally available for monitoring of body weight and BMI, and recent guidance papers from the GLIM consortium have clarified that anthropometry, including for instance calf circumference, is also acceptable for assessment of skeletal muscle mass [46].

# 4.1.1. Patients and risk factors

As mentioned above, malnutrition screening and diagnosis could and should be made available in primary care due to availability of simple screening and diagnostic tools. Simple but fundamental clinical information such as body weight and potentially calf circumference could be routinely collected in most patients, but risk factors supporting regular monitoring of malnutrition risk include older age [11], chronic disease [13-20], recovery from acute catabolic diseases and recent hospitalizations including surgery and ICU admissions [21-23,47,48]. Malnutrition screening and diagnosis have been indeed explicitly included in a recent WHO-Europe manual collecting brief interventions for prevention

of non-communicable diseases in primary care. This recognition implies the relevance of monitoring nutritional state in older individuals and NCD patients to prevent secondary DRM and its negative impact on outcome [24].

# 4.2. Primary care multidisciplinary teams and referral pathways

# 4.2.1. Assessment

Once malnutrition risk is established and/-or malnutrition is diagnosed, a complete assessment of nutritional state is recommended. This includes collection of additional information to determine malnutrition etiology, degree of nutritional deficiencies, potential functional impairment with disabilities and frailty related to low skeletal muscle mass, identification of comorbidities and potential biochemical derangements. While physicians are encouraged to acquire nutrition skills, dietitians or other qualified nutrition specialists, and multidisciplinary nutrition teams should be ideally made available also in the primary care setting to implement nutritional assessment. As mentioned above, strategies to routinely establish primary care multidisciplinary teams with adequate composition and nutrition competence is currently missing in most Countries and settings. In the absence of multidisciplinary teams or primary healthcare professionals with adequate nutrition skills, primary care physicians should be able to refer patients with aging- or disease-related malnutrition to non-primary care professionals.

# 4.2.2. Treatment and monitoring

when malnutrition risk and/or diagnosis of malnutrition indicate the need for nutritional treatment, the latter should be implemented after full assessment to identify ideal nutritional treatment and modality (e.g., oral dietary supplementation, enteral nutrition, parenteral nutrition). Optimal nutritional treatment should be implemented in the most appropriate setting. Dietary counselling, combined with medical nutrition if needed may notably be commonly initiated in the primary care setting, particularly when primary care dietitians are available. If not, physicians or other healthcare professionals with an adequate level of nutrition skills should initiate nutritional interventions within the primary care multidisciplinary teams. If not, physicians or other healthcare professionals with an adequate level of nutrition skills could also initiate nutritional interventions, ideally within primary care multidisciplinary teams. Treatment may conversely need to be initiated and continued in secondary or tertiary healthcare settings, depending on the level of complexity and required specialized skills. Monitoring of treatment results should be likewise regularly performed.

# 4.2.3. Malnutrition and sarcopenia in obesity

The obesity epidemics is well recognized and poses substantial challenges at primary healthcare level. We recognize the huge health threats posed by obesity, and we advocate prevention and treatment strategies to be implemented in primary care, including healthy nutrition and lifestyle. For the purpose of the current position paper, we wish to underscore the importance of complex nutritional deficiencies that may further worsen health risks for persons with obesity, through the onset of malnutrition and sarcopenia, particularly in the presence of older age and acute or chronic comorbidities. For malnutrition screening and diagnosis, the same tools mentioned for persons without obesity may be used. In addition, a recent consensus algorithm for diagnosis of sarcopenia in persons with obesity has been published under the auspices of ESPEN and the European Association for the Study of Obesity (EASO) by an international group of experts in the field [6,49]. The algorithm was developed with the goal to allow for implementation also in primary care, as indeed validated in an initial cohort study [50].

# 5. Conclusions: Seeking a collaborative strategy

Early detection of individuals at risk for malnutrition or already malnourished has huge potential to allow early effective nutritional care, and therefore to improve outcomes in older adults, in persons living with chronic disease conditions and to enhance recovery after acute disease and hospitalization. Clinical benefits notably include, but are not limited to, reduced comorbidities and disabilities, reduced hospitalizations and readmissions, reduced disabilities and improved quality of life, with lower costs for healthcare.

ESPEN hereby advocates collaboration with PCHPs organizations in order to:

1) promote awareness on malnutrition, particularly aging- and disease-related  
2) promote enhancement of nutrition skills in PCHPs including primary care physicians  
3) promote availability and accessibility of dietitians in the primary care setting  
4) promote establishment of multidisciplinary teams in primary care to allow for post-diagnostic assessment and initial treatment approaches when feasible;  
5) promote establishment of referral pathways to secondary and tertiary care settings, including specialized outpatient care or hospitalization when appropriate.

ESPEN is therefore committed to seek opportunities to collaborate with PCHPs organizations with available tools (including educational programmes and guidelines) as well as innovative joint initiatives.

# References

[1] Saunders J, Smith T. Malnutrition: causes and consequences. Clin Med 2010;10(6):624-7.  
[2] Cederholm T, Barazzoni R, Austin P, Ballmer P, Biolo G, Bischoff SC, et al. ESPEN guidelines on definitions and terminology of clinical nutrition. Clin Nutr 2017;36(1):49-64.  
[3] Muscaritoli M, Imbimbo G, Jager-Wittenaar H, Cederholm T, Rothenberg E, di Girolamo FG, et al. Disease-related malnutrition with inflammation and cachexia. Clin Nutr 2023;42(8):1475-9.  
[4] Cederholm T, Jensen GL, Correia M, Gonzalez MC, Fukushima R, Higashiguchi T, et al. GLIM criteria for the diagnosis of malnutrition - a consensus report from the global clinical nutrition community. Clin Nutr 2019;38(1):1-9.  
[5] Barazzoni R, Bischoff SC, Boirie Y, Busetto L, Cederholm T, Dicker D, et al. Sarcopenic obesity: time to meet the challenge. Clin Nutr 2018;37(6 Pt A): 1787-93.  
[6] Donini LM, Busetto L, Bischoff SC, Cederholm T, Ballesteros-Pomar MD, Batsis JA, et al. Definition and diagnostic criteria for sarcopenic obesity: ESPEN and EASO consensus statement. Clin Nutr 2022;41(4):990-1000.  
[7] Barazzoni R, Cederholm T, Zanetti M, Gortan Cappellari G. Defining and diagnosing sarcopenia: is the glass now half full? Metabolism. Clin Exp 2023;143: 155558.  
[8] Cereda E, Pedrolli C, Klersy C, Bonardi C, Quarleri L, Cappello S, et al. Nutritional status in older persons according to healthcare setting: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence data using MNA((R)). Clin Nutr 2016;35(6):1282-90.  
[9] Leij-Halfwerk S, Verwijs MH, van Houdt S, Borkent JW, Guaitoli PR, Pelgrim T, et al. Prevalence of protein-energy malnutrition risk in European older adults in community, residential and hospital settings, according to 22 malnutrition screening tools validated for use in adults  $> / = 65$  years: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Maturitas 2019;126:80-9.  
[10] Cederholm T, Barazzoni R. Validity and feasibility of the global leadership initiative on malnutrition diagnostic concept in older people: a literature review from August 2021 to August 2022. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2023;26(1):23-31.  
[11] Vollert D, Beck AM, Cederholm T, Cruz-Jentoft A, Goisser S, Hooper L, et al. ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition and hydration in geriatrics. Clin Nutr 2019;38(1):10-47.  
[12] Muscaritoli M, Krznaric Z, Singer P, Barazzoni R, Cederholm T, Golay A, et al. Effectiveness and efficacy of nutritional therapy: a systematic review following Cochrane methodology. Clin Nutr 2017;36(4):939-57.

[13] Volkert D, Chourdakis M, Faxen-Irving G, Fruhwald T, Landi F, Suominen MH, et al. ESPEN guidelines on nutrition in dementia. Clin Nutr 2015;34(6): 1052-73.  
[14] Arends J, Bachmann P, Baracos V, Barthelemy N, Bertz H, Bozzetti F, et al. ESPEN guidelines on nutrition in cancer patients. Clin Nutr 2017;36(1):11-48.  
[15] Arvanitakis M, Ockenga J, Bezmarevic M, Gianotti L, Krznaric Z, Lobo DN, et al. ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition in acute and chronic pancreatitis. Clin Nutr 2020;39(3):612-31.  
[16] Bischoff SC, Barazzoni R, Busetto L, Campmans-Kuijpers M, Cardinale V, Chermesh I, et al. European guideline on obesity care in patients with gastrointestinal and liver diseases - joint ESPEN/UEG guideline. Clin Nutr 2022;41(10):2364-405.  
[17] Forbes A, Escher J, Hebuterne X, Klek S, Krznaric Z, Schneider S, et al. ESPEN guideline: clinical nutrition in inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Nutr 2017;36(2):321-47.  
[18] Gomes F, Schuetz P, Bounoure L, Austin P, Ballesteros-Pomar M, Cederholm T, et al. ESPEN guidelines on nutritional support for polymorbid internal medicine patients. Clin Nutr 2018;37(1):336-53.  
[19] Pironi L, Arends J, Bozzetti F, Cuerda C, Gillanders L, Jeppesen PB, et al. ESPEN guidelines on chronic intestinal failure in adults. Clin Nutr 2016;35(2): 247-307.  
[20] Plauth M, Bernal W, Dasarathy S, Merli M, Plank LD, Schutz T, et al. ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition in liver disease. Clin Nutr 2019;38(2):485-521.  
[21] Rousseau AF, Losser MR, Ichai C, Berger MM. ESPEN endorsed recommendations: nutritional therapy in major burns. Clin Nutr 2013;32(4):497-502.  
[22] Singer P, Blaser AR, Berger MM, Alhazzani W, Calder PC, Casaer MP, et al. ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition in the intensive care unit. Clin Nutr 2019;38(1):48-79.  
[23] Weimann A, Braga M, Carli F, Higashiguchi T, Hubner M, Klek S, et al. ESPEN guideline: clinical nutrition in surgery. Clin Nutr 2017;36(3):623-50.  
[24] Barazzoni R, Pirlich M, Chourdakis M, Cuerda C, Malykh R, Jurgutis A, et al. Brief interventions to prevent NCDs and their nutritional complications in primary care setting. Clin Nutr 2023;42(6):1034-5.  
[25] Browne S, Geraghty A, Corish C. Advances in knowledge of screening practices and their use in clinical practice to prevent malnutrition. Proc Nutr Soc 2022;81(1):41-8.  
[26] Browne S, Kelly L, Geraghty AA, Reynolds CM, McBean L, McCallum K, et al. Healthcare professionals' perceptions of malnutrition management and oral nutritional supplement prescribing in the community: a qualitative study. Clin Nutr ESPEN 2021;44:415-23.  
[27] Kushner RF. Barriers to providing nutrition counseling by physicians: a survey of primary care practitioners. Prev Med 1995;24(6):546-52.  
[28] Cuerda C, Schneider SM, Van Gossum A. Clinical nutrition education in medical schools: results of an ESPEN survey. Clin Nutr 2017;36(4):915-6.  
[29] Mowe M, Bosaeus I, Rasmussen HH, Kondrup J, Unosson M, Rothenberg E, et al. Insufficient nutritional knowledge among health care workers? Clin Nutr 2008;27(2):196-202.  
[30] Wynn K, Trudeau JD, Taunton K, Gowans M, Scott I. Nutrition in primary care: current practices, attitudes, and barriers. Canadian family physician Medecin de famille canadien 2010;56(3):e109-16.  
[31] Dominguez Castro P, Reynolds CM, Kennelly S, Clyne B, Bury G, Hanlon D, et al. General practitioners' views on malnutrition management and oral nutritional supplementation prescription in the community: a qualitative study. Clin Nutr ESPEN 2020;36:116-27.  
[32] Cuerda C, Muscaritoli M, Chourdakis M, Krznaric Z, Archodoulakis A, Gurbuz S, et al. Nutrition education in medical schools (NEMS) project: promoting clinical nutrition in medical schools - perspectives from different actors. Clin Nutr 2023;42(1):54-9.  
[33] Cuerda C, Muscaritoli M, Donini LM, Baque P, Barazzoni R, Gaudio E, et al. Nutrition education in medical schools (NEMS). An ESPEN position paper. Clin Nutr 2019;38(3):969-74.  
[34] Cuerda C, Muscaritoli M, Krznaric Z, Pirlich M, Van Gossum A, Schneider S, et al. Nutrition education in medical schools (NEMS) project: joining ESPEN and university point of view. Clin Nutr 2021;40(5):2754-61.  
[35] Grammatikopoulou MG, Katsouda A, Lekka K, Tsantekidis K, Bouras E, Kasapidou E, et al. Is continuing medical education sufficient? Assessing the clinical nutrition knowledge of medical doctors. Nutrition 2019;57:69-73.  
[36] Dall TRR, Chakrabarti R, Jones K, Iacobucci W. The complexities of physician supply and demand: projections from 2018 to 2033. 2020.  
[37] Majeed A. Shortage of general practitioners in the NHS. BMJ 2017;358:j3191.  
[38] Abbo ED, Zhang Q, Zelder M, Huang ES. The increasing number of clinical items addressed during the time of adult primary care visits. J Gen Intern Med 2008;23(12):2058-65.  
[39] Green SM, James EP, Latter S, Sutcliffe M, Fader MJ. Barriers and facilitators to screening for malnutrition by community nurses: a qualitative study. J Hum Nutr Diet : Off J Br Diet Assoc 2014;27(1):88-95.  
[40] de van der Schueren MAE, Jager-Wittenaar H. Malnutrition risk screening: new insights in a new era. Clin Nutr 2022;41(10):2163-8.  
[41] (BAPEN). BAFEaPN. The 'MUST' explanatory booklet. A guide to 'Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool' ('MUST') for adults. Available at: http://www.bapen.org.uk/pdfs/must/must_explan.pdf. [Accessed 3 July 2023].  
[42] Raslan M, Gonzalez MC, Dias MC, Nascimento M, Castro M, Marques P, et al. Comparison of nutritional risk screening tools for predicting clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients. Nutrition 2010;26(7-8):721-6.