index [BMI], or low muscle mass) as evidence of loss of nutritional reserve and one etiologic criterion (disease- or injury-related inflammation or inadequate food intake/assimilation) [20,21]. Thresholds are provided for the phenotypic criteria to discern whether malnutrition is moderate or severe in degree. GLIM phenotypic and etiologic variables are congruent with other approaches used by nutrition experts to identify malnutrition risk such as the NRS-2002 [22,23], and malnutrition diagnosis such as the Academy ASPEN Indicators of Malnutrition [24], and Subjective Global Assessment (SGA) [25]. To the extent that variables used to diagnose malnutrition are evaluated and reported using consistent terminology, the global community will be empowered to identify optimal medical nutrition strategies to improve outcomes of patients experiencing malnutrition.

Although GLIM was not conceived for use primarily in critical illness, diagnosing malnutrition using GLIM criteria is feasible [4,26,27]. The GLIM approach has construct validity in identifying malnutrition in this population when measured early upon ICU admission, with  $>80\%$  sensitivity and specificity compared with SGA [28-30]. Nevertheless, comparisons assessing malnutrition using GLIM at later times during the ICU stay are not yet available.

To assist clinicians in a wide variety of global critical care settings and improve consistent timing of diagnosis of malnutrition, a modified Delphi approach was conducted to develop guidance statements for the use of GLIM in the assessment of malnutrition accompanying critical illness.

# 2. Methods

The GLIM core leadership representing four major global clinical nutrition societies (American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition [ASPEN], European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism [ESPEN], Latin American Federation for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition [FELANPE], and Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Society of Asia [PENSA]) appointed a primary working group to draft guidance statements for review. This working group included two co-chairs (Charlene Compher, Ryoji Fukushima) and representatives of each society (ASPEN: Liam McKeever, Jayshil Patel; ESPEN: Pierre Singer, Christian Stoppe; FELANPE: M.Isabel T.D. Correia, M.Cristina Gonzalez; PENSA: Kensuke Nakamura, Zheng-Yii Lee). Subsequently, the working group nominated additional individuals to bring additional expertise and further extend global representation. The expanded group of experts brought the total to 36, with balanced representation from the four global societies.

The co-chairs prepared draft guidance statements for review and edits. Transparency was maintained as the feedback and revisions were shared with all participants. Once a draft set of statements was developed, a modified Delphi process was launched to ascertain the level of agreement for each statement using Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap, Vanderbilt University, USA). The survey queried the level of agreement on a 5-point scale as "strongly disagree, disagree, indifferent, agree, or strongly agree". The percentage of agree plus strongly agree responses was computed relative to the sample size. The a priori consensus threshold for acceptance of an individual guidance statement was set at  $75\%$  agree/strongly agree.

# 3. Results

The guidance statements generated from this process are listed below, together with the level of agreement based on the Delphi round and the rationale for each statement. Because  $>75\%$  agreement was surpassed on the first Delphi round, no further rounds were undertaken. The statements represent what the panel of

experts thought appropriate for most settings, bearing in mind that clinicians must use their judgment as to whether the suggested approach is feasible or appropriate.

# 3.1. Statement 1. identifying pre-existing malnutrition at ICU admission

We suggest that patients (including those with overweight and obesity) be evaluated for malnutrition using phenotypic (weight loss, low body mass index [BMI], and low muscle mass), and etiologic (inflammation and inadequate food intake/assimilation) criteria within  $48\mathrm{h}$  after ICU admission when feasible. Other approaches to malnutrition diagnosis that use similar criteria may be applied or integrated with these GLIM criteria.

# The agree/strongly agree responses for this statement were  $100\%$ .

When it is not feasible to evaluate patients for malnutrition during the first  $48\mathrm{h}$ , we suggest evaluation within 4 days.

The agree/strongly agree responses were  $94.4\%$  with  $2.8\%$  indifferent and  $2.8\%$  in disagreement.

# 3.2. Rationale

Pre-existing malnutrition is a potentially treatable condition, and strongly predictive of poor clinical outcomes [1,3,4]. While the optimal dosing and timing of macro- and micro-nutrients for treating malnutrition in critically ill patients are still under investigation, early identification of malnutrition will allow for timely intervention once these treatment guidelines are determined. Furthermore, patients who are malnourished present a high risk for refeeding syndrome and require a vigilant approach to feeding to avoid adverse electrolyte disturbances and organ dysfunction [31]. For these reasons, when feasible, the modified Delphi process found  $100\%$  agreement to support assessing all patients admitted to the ICU for malnutrition within  $48\mathrm{h}$  with the exception that short-term ICU patients admitted for monitoring rather than organ support may not always warrant early malnutrition assessment. The authors also recognize that it may be more feasible to obtain dietary intake and weight loss history from patients or their surrogates within 4 days.

Disease-related malnutrition may be caused or exacerbated by acute or chronic inflammatory responses that trigger muscle catabolism. A diagnosis associated with an expected prolonged hospital stay or severe inflammatory response may satisfy the etiologic criterion of GLIM and indicate a risk of malnutrition [32]. While many studies consider the critical illness diagnosis as the inflammation etiology for the condition, some also suggest measurement of inflammatory markers such as C reactive protein (CRP) [32,33]. Provided laboratory resources are available, measurement of CRP is suggested when the presence of significant inflammation is otherwise unclear [32]. Inflammation may negatively affect appetite and food intake and promote loss of body weight and muscle mass [5,32,33]. Chronic gastrointestinal disease or acute gastrointestinal symptoms/signs may limit the assimilation of nutrients from ingested food.

Medical treatments may contribute to unintentional weight loss. For example, therapy for oncologic diagnoses may result in anorexia, dysgeusia, mucositis and dysphagia, and nausea that compromise oral intake. These processes may result in unintended weight loss or decreases in muscle mass prior to ICU admission that may impact tolerance to further nutrition therapy, recovery, and survival [34].

Identifying the phenotypic variables for the initial nutrition assessment may be confounded in some patients in the ICU, particularly after fluid resuscitation. Weight from a prior

hospitalization, known pre-hospital weight, self- or surrogate-reported change in weight, and/or baseline measurements prior to fluid resuscitation can be helpful in these scenarios. Most measures of muscle mass are altered by excess fluid loading, but baseline measurements taken prior to fluid resuscitation may be feasible in some cases.

Excess body weight does not protect against malnutrition; in fact, it can sometimes mask loss of muscle mass [35,36]. Patients with excess adiposity may also have sarcopenic obesity (low muscle mass and strength despite high body fat) [37], which is particularly concerning in critical illness due to the risk of further loss of muscle mass. Clinicians are especially challenged to recognize these somatic changes in patients with overweight or obesity unless the patients or their families are questioned about weight loss [38,39], or actual measurement of muscle mass is undertaken.

# 3.3. Statement 2. identifying the development and progression of malnutrition during the ICU stay

We suggest that patients who were not diagnosed with malnutrition at ICU admission be reevaluated within 7-10 days as they are at high risk for developing malnutrition during this time. Because patients may experience recurrent episodes impacting multiple organ system function with inflammatory/infectious complications, prolonged ICU stay can ensue. Reevaluating the nutrition status every 7-10 days is advised to optimize nutritional management, irrespective of whether malnutrition was diagnosed during the initial  $48\mathrm{h}$ .

The agree/strongly agree responses were  $97.2\%$ , with  $2.8\%$  indifferent.

# 3.4. Rationale

Proteolysis and loss of muscle mass are hallmarks of critical illness [7,40]. The inadequate delivery of macronutrients is a well-documented occurrence in the ICU setting due to modifiable and difficult to manage metabolic and logistical barriers [41-43], but the utilization of protein for muscle protein synthesis is also blunted [5]. Patients with a prolonged ICU stay may experience a higher frequency of gastrointestinal and/or metabolic intolerance and disuse atrophy of muscle related to immobilization. Together, these factors contribute to impaired nutritional status.

We suggest reassessing the nutrition status of patients who remain in the ICU for more than 7 days, a period when nosocomial infections [44] and significant skeletal muscle wasting have been shown to occur [7,45]. These losses continue over the first 2-3 weeks (although at a slower rate) [40,41], and then may plateau [42] or continue after ICU discharge [45]. Such reevaluation may aid in prognostication. However, the optimal nutrition therapy to mitigate the negative consequences of malnutrition is still under investigation. As progressive muscle loss is closely associated with ongoing inflammatory/infectious conditions, persistent catabolism should always lead to a critical re-evaluation of the therapeutic measures used to treat these conditions.

# 3.5. Statement 3. identifying progressive loss of muscle mass

Given the risk of significant loss of muscle mass during critical illness, we suggest the evaluation of muscle mass as soon as feasible in most patients.

# The agree/strongly agree responses were  $91.7\%$ , with  $8.3\%$  indifferent.

We also suggest reevaluation of muscle mass in patients who remain in the ICU after 7-10 days using any available validated tools when feasible.

The agree/strongly agree responses were  $89\%$ , with  $11\%$  indifferent.

# 3.6. Rationale

Accurately and precisely measuring muscle mass in the ICU is challenged by numerous factors (such as fluctuating fluid status, hemodynamic instability, and violations of steady state conditions) as well as access to appropriate equipment. Anasarca and edema may complicate the use and interpretation of any measurements of muscle mass early in the ICU course [46,47], but the feasibility and reliability of measurement increase when the fluid status and clinical condition gradually improve [48,49]. To identify progressive loss of muscle mass, repeated measurements using the same device are needed after intervals of 7-10 days due to methodologic sensitivity to change in muscle mass. Each measurement should consider the patient's hydration status and the limitations of the device.

Patients with critical illness frequently have computed tomography (CT) scans of the abdomen and/or pelvis ordered for clinical indications. These scans may be utilized for quantification of skeletal muscle cross-sectional area (CSA) at the third lumbar vertebrae level [50]. However, CT scan measurements can only be assessed when ordered for diagnostic purposes, leading to potential bias in terms of which patients are represented in clinical studies [47]. Using repeated CT images to assess body composition is uncommon and challenging, as it requires evaluating changes from the same body region consistently, using the same equipment parameters, and with a comparable level of contrast. Accessing appropriately formatted CT imaging for software analyses may require collaboration with Radiology personnel. Transporting potentially unstable patients to the CT scanner and radiation exposure are practical barriers limiting the use of CT scan imaging for prospective assessment of body composition [46]. However, despite these challenges and even if longitudinal scans are not available, CT is helpful in identifying low muscle at ICU admission. Analyzing the scans for muscle mass was formerly time-consuming and required extensive training. However, with the automated open access software currently available [51], one can evaluate total muscle CSA at L3 quickly and accurately to assess low muscle mass, a measure associated with poor clinical outcomes [38,39,51-54]. Finally, cut points have been derived within ICU populations to distinguish those with low muscle from those with normal muscle indices and can be used for general screening; however, comprehensive validation studies are still needed to accurately identify those requiring enhanced nutrition care and physical rehabilitation.

Ultrasound (US) measures of quadriceps muscle area demonstrate reduced muscle quantity over the course of ICU admission [55,56]. Every  $1\%$  loss of rectus femoris CSA in the first week of ICU stay is associated with  $5\%$  increase in the odds of mortality by 60 days [56]. Ultrasound measures of muscle mass are limited by lack of a universal measurement protocol, lack of congruence on which muscle site to measure, lack of standardized equipment and probe use, and lack of cutoff values to identify low muscle area [46,47]. In patients with obesity, US scans require greater scanning depth which can result in loss of image resolution and loss of precision [47]. While some investigators report that US measures are less influenced by change in hydration than other bedside approaches [57], not all studies agree [58]. Thus, serial US-based measures of muscle should be interpreted with caution.

Bioimpedance methods estimate muscle mass-related compartments (fat-free mass, appendicular lean soft tissue, or skeletal muscle mass) [13,15-17]. At ICU admission, identification of patients who had low fat-free mass measured by bioimpedance spectroscopy had low muscle area by CT scan [59]. Bioimpedance

Table 1 Questions that address research gaps in the diagnosis of malnutrition during and after critical illness.  

<table><tr><td>·Are staffing levels in critical care units and hospitals adequate to achieve these suggested milestones of malnutrition assessment?</td></tr><tr><td>·Does malnutrition risk assessment identify patients who will benefit from a medical nutrition therapy intervention?</td></tr><tr><td>·In patients diagnosed with malnutrition at ICU admission, what patient and treatment characteristics are associated with stability or change in nutrition status by ICU discharge, hospital discharge, and after hospital discharge?</td></tr><tr><td>·What baseline characteristics in patients with preexisting malnutrition or that which developed during the ICU stay, can help identify patients who are most likely to benefit from a nutrition intervention?</td></tr><tr><td>·Should patients who are malnourished receive a different medical nutrition therapy intervention than those who are at risk of malnutrition?</td></tr><tr><td>·What outcomes, including physical function and quality of life, are most impacted by nutrition interventions in patients who are malnourished? When should these outcomes be assessed?</td></tr><tr><td>·Does the optimal timing for nutrition assessment vary depending on the severity of the disease-based inflammation?</td></tr><tr><td>·After ICU discharge, what is the optimal timing of nutrition reassessment?</td></tr><tr><td>·Will publication of specific phenotypic criteria for patients with critical illness facilitate the identification or adjustment of these criteria for use in this population?</td></tr><tr><td>·Will the use of consistent language to describe phenotypic variables across multiple clinical visits help identify the evolution of malnutrition?</td></tr></table>

measures can give a real-time indirect assessment of body composition, estimated from equations or algorithms that are often not disclosed by the device manufacturer. However, cut points used to identify low muscle mass are not yet available [49,60]. Additionally, most equations use weight and height, which are not always available in critically ill patients. Impairment in fluid distribution may impair the validity of bioimpedance-based estimations. However, once the fluid status gradually becomes normalized, repeated measures over 7–10-day intervals may be feasible and meaningful.

Identification of the phenotypic criteria used to categorize the severity of malnutrition will require flexibility in low resource settings. In settings where technology-based measures of muscle mass are not feasible, calf or mid-upper arm circumference measurements may give an indication of low muscle mass [61,62]. Calf muscle circumference can also be measured and compared to established cut points to differentiate low muscle mass [6,11,14,48]. Mid-upper arm circumference is also generally feasible with normative standards [20]. Nutrition focused physical examination (NFPE) that includes evaluation of temporal, deltoid, biceps, triceps, pectoralis, suprascapular, quadriceps and interosseus muscle groups may be applied by trained evaluators [63,64]. However, these methods may not identify all patients with low muscle mass, and their sensitivity for repeated measures is still to be evaluated [59].

Low muscle mass is associated with weakness and poor muscle function, longer ICU and hospital stay [12,13]. While it is challenging to identify patients with low muscle mass at ICU admission, even those with adequate muscle at ICU admission are at risk of acute muscle loss during the ICU stay. Muscle mass in the ICU is typically assessed only once, near admission, with changes over time seldom monitored. As reported with US measures of muscle mass [7,40,65], an initial measurement followed by a second measurement just prior to ICU discharge when edema may be less confounding might serve to give valuable insight into muscle mass trends. This data is crucial for understanding its impact on physical function after discharge. In addition to aiding prognostication, identifying the trajectory of muscle loss will help shape the post-ICU nutritional and physical rehabilitation plans as well as resource allocation.

# 3.7. Statement 4. identifying the development and progression of malnutrition prior to and after ICU discharge

In patients with critical illness, we suggest that the nutritional status be reevaluated prior to ICU discharge. We also suggest that patients discharged from an ICU stay greater than 1 week have their nutrition status reevaluated during clinical visits that follow as staffing permits.

# The agree/strongly agree responses were  $100\%$ .

# 3.8. Rationale

Most studies to date have evaluated malnutrition at baseline, but fewer reevaluate nutrition status at ICU or hospital discharge or later timeframes. Evaluating malnutrition criteria at these time points represents an opportunity to assure appropriate continuity of care, close research gaps about the trajectory of nutrition status during and following critical illness and inform the impact of malnutrition on the quality of life and function in ICU survivors. Assessment of malnutrition just prior to ICU discharge can inform the nutritional support required in the next phase of their care, whether the discharge is to the hospital ward, rehabilitation center, or home. If the receiving care team understands whether a patient continues to manifest malnutrition, the nutrition therapy may be expedited and tailored to the needs of the patient. Such knowledge may identify modifiable risk factors for the acquisition of malnutrition during critical illness, potentially opening pathways for testing novel therapeutic targets.

Data on malnutrition after hospital discharge are limited, but clinics treating patients post COVID-19 infection have documented that malnutrition is more prevalent in patients who required ICU admission, with almost  $30\%$  remaining malnourished 30 days after hospital discharge [66]. In some regions, patients are referred to PICS clinic visits due to loss of muscle mass and impaired respiratory function [67] and malnutrition that had been identified during the ICU stay [19]. Up to a year after ICU discharge, survivors of more than 7 days of ICU care have below expected intakes of energy and protein [68]. Whether PICS can be prevented by optimal nutrition therapy during the ICU stay or treated with a nutritional intervention after discharge is not yet established. However, the identification of malnutrition that continues after ICU discharge provides an opportunity to provide continuity of nutritional management if staffing levels permit.

# 3.9. Research gaps

From admission to discharge and beyond, patients with critical illness are at risk of malnutrition. In critically ill adults, numerous research gaps limit the harmonization of nutrition assessment and implementation of personalized nutrition therapy practices. To optimize clinical practice and address research gaps, studies are needed that uniformly report phenotypic and etiologic variables that identify malnutrition, enabling clinicians to map the arc of malnutrition and begin to explore impactful treatment modalities at each juncture. The research questions in Table 1 represent what is needed to translate expert opinion about malnutrition during critical illness into evidence-based recommendations.

# 4. Conclusion

Assessment of phenotypic and etiologic variables at ICU admission and reassessment during the ICU and hospital stays and in subsequent outpatient visits is vitally important as this information will enable clinicians to appreciate the trajectory of malnutrition and explore impactful treatment modalities at each juncture.

# Financial disclosure statement

None declared.

# Conflict of interest

None declared.

# References

[1] Vallejo KP, Martinez CM, Matos Adames AA, Fuchs-Tarlovsky V, Nogales GCC, Paz RER, et al. Current clinical nutrition practices in critically ill patients in Latin America: a multinational observational study. Crit Care 2017;21(1):227. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-017-1805-z.  
[2] Canales C, Elsayes A, Yeh DD, Belcher D, Nakayama A, McCarthy CM, et al. Nutrition risk in critically ill versus the nutritional risk screening 2002: are they comparable for assessing risk of malnutrition in critically ill patients? J Parenter Enter Nutr 2019;43(1):81-7. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.1181.  
[3] Lew CCH, Yandell R, Fraser RJL, Chua AP, Chong MFF, Miller M. Association between malnutrition and clinical outcomes in the intensive care unit: a systematic review [Formula: see text]. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2017;41(5): 744-58. https://doi.org/10.1177/0148607115625638.  
[4] Lew CCH, Lee ZY, Day AG, Jiang X, Bear D, Jensen GL, et al. The association between malnutrition and high protein treatment on outcomes in critically ill patients: a post hoc analysis of the EFFORT protein randomized trial. Chest 2024;165(6):1380-91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2024.02.008.  
[5] Chapple LS, Kouw IWK, Summers MJ, Weinel LM, Gluck S, Raith E, et al. Muscle protein synthesis after protein administration in critical illness. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2022;206(6):740-9. https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.202112-2780OC.  
[6] Hermans G, Van den Berghe G. Clinical review: intensive care unit acquired weakness. Crit Care 2015;19(1):274. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-015-0993-7.  
[7] Puthucheary ZA, Rawal J, McPhail M, Connolly B, Ratnayake G, Chan P, et al. Acute skeletal muscle wasting in critical illness. JAMA 2013;310(15): 1591-600. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.278481.  
[8] Heyland DK. The Effect of Higher Protein Dosing in Critically Ill Patients (EFFORT). (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03160547? term=Heyland&rank=8).  
[9] Reignier J, Boisrame-Helms J, Brisard L, Lascarrou JB, Ait Hssain A, Anguel N, et al. Enteral versus parenteral early nutrition in ventilated adults with shock: a randomised, controlled, multicentre, open-label, parallel-group study (NUTRIREA-2). Lancet 2018;391(10116):133-43. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32146-3.  
[10] Reignier J, Plantefeve G, Mira JP, Argaud L, Asfar P, Aissaoui N, et al. Low versus standard calorie and protein feeding in ventilated adults with shock: a randomised, controlled, multicentre, open-label, parallel-group trial (NUTRIREA-3). Lancet Respir Med 2023;11(7):602-12. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(23)00092-9.  
[11] Ridley EJ, Parke RL, Davies AR, Bailey M, Hodgson C, Deane AM, et al. What happens to nutrition intake in the post-intensive care unit hospitalization period? An observational cohort study in critically ill adults. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2019;43(1):88-95. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.1196.  
[12] Singer P, Blaser AR, Berger MM, Alhazzani W, Calder PC, Casaer MP, et al. ESPEN guideline on clinical nutrition in the intensive care unit. Clin Nutr 2019;38(1):48-79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chnu.2018.08.037.  
[13] Smith TJ, McClung JP. Nutrition, immune function, and infectious disease. Med J 2021; (PB 8-21-01/02/03):133-6. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33666926.  
[14] Kreitmann L, Helms J, Martin-Loeches I, Salluh J, Poulakou G, Pene F, et al. ICU-acquired infections in immunocompromised patients. Intensive Care Med 2024;50(3):332-49. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-023-07295-2.  
[15] Van Aerde N, Van den Berghe G, Wilmer A, Gosselink R, Hermans G, Consortium C.-. Intensive care unit acquired muscle weakness in COVID-19 patients. Intensive Care Med 2020;46(11):2083-5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00134-020-06244-7.  
[16] Chadda KR, Puthucheary Z. Persistent inflammation, immunosuppression, and catabolism syndrome (PICS): a review of definitions, potential therapies, and research priorities. Br J Anaesth 2024;132(3):507-18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2023.11.052.

[17] Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, Hopkins RO, Weinert C, Wunsch H, et al. Improving long-term outcomes after discharge from intensive care unit: report from a stakeholders' conference. Crit Care Med 2012;40(2):502-9. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0b013e318232da75.  
[18] Herridge MS, Azoulay E. Outcomes after critical illness. N Engl J Med 2023;388(10):913-24. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra2104669.  
[19] Nakanishi N, Liu K, Hatakeyama J, Kawauchi A, Yoshida M, Sumita H, et al. Post-intensive care syndrome follow-up system after hospital discharge: a narrative review. J Intensive Care 2024;12(1):2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40560-023-00716-w.  
[20] Jensen GL, Cederholm T, Correia M, Gonzalez MC, Fukushima R, Higashiguchi T, et al. GLIM criteria for the diagnosis of malnutrition: a consensus report from the global clinical nutrition community. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2019;43(1):32-40. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.1440.  
[21] Cederholm T, Jensen GL, Correia M, Gonzalez MC, Fukushima R, Higashiguchi T, et al. GLIM criteria for the diagnosis of malnutrition - a consensus report from the global clinical nutrition community. Clin Nutr 2019;38(1):1-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2018.08.002.  
[22] Hersberger L, Bargetzi L, Bargetzi A, Tribolet P, Fehr R, Baechli V, et al. Nutritional risk screening (NRS 2002) is a strong and modifiable predictor risk score for short-term and long-term clinical outcomes: secondary analysis of a prospective randomised trial. Clin Nutr 2020;39(9):2720-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2019.11.041.  
[23] Kondrup J, Rasmussen HH, Hamberg O, Stanga Z, Ad Hoc EWG. Nutritional risk screening (NRS 2002): a new method based on an analysis of controlled clinical trials. Clin Nutr 2003;22(3):321-36. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0261-5614(02)00214-5.  
[24] White JV, Guenter P, Jensen G, Malone A, Schofield M. Consensus statement: Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: characteristics recommended for the identification and documentation of adult malnutrition (undernutrition). J Parenter Enter Nutr 2012;36(3):275-83. https://doi.org/10.1177/0148607112440285.  
[25] Detsky AS, McLaughlin JR, Baker JP, Johnston N, Whittaker S, Mendelson RA, et al. What is subjective global assessment of nutritional status? J Parenter Enter Nutr 1987;11(1):8-13. https://doi.org/10.1177/014860718701100108.  
[26] Foletto E, Bernardes S, Milanez DSJ, Razzera EL, Silva FM. Complementarity of nutrition screening with global leadership initiative on malnutrition criteria for diagnosing malnutrition in critically ill patients: a comparison study of nutritional risk screening 2002 and modified nutrition risk in the critically ill score. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2024;48(4):440-8. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.2629.  
[27] Milanez DSJ, Razzera EL, Lima J, Silva FM. Feasibility and criterion validity of the GLIM criteria in the critically ill: a prospective cohort study. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2023;47(6):754-65. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.2536.  
[28] Theilla M, Rattanachaiwong S, Kagan I, Rigler M, Bendavid I, Singer P. Validation of GLIM malnutrition criteria for diagnosis of malnutrition in ICU patients: an observational study. Clin Nutr 2021;40(5):3578-84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2020.12.021.  
[29] Shahbazi S, Hajimohammaddebrahim-Ketabforoush M, Vahdat Shariatpanahi M, Shahbazi E, Vahdat Shariatpanahi Z. The validity of the global leadership initiative on malnutrition criteria for diagnosing malnutrition in critically ill patients with COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. Clin Nutr ESPEN 2021;43:377-82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnesp.2021.03.020.  
[30] Gersely GD, Klein RCM, da Rocha G, Bruzaca WFS, Ribeiro LMK, Santos BC, et al. GLIM criteria validation and reliability in critically ill patients with cancer: a prospective study. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2024;48(6):726-34. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.2657.  
[31] Doig GS, Simpson F, Heighes PT, Bellomo R, Chesher D, Caterson ID, et al. Restricted versus continued standard caloric intake during the management of refeeding syndrome in critically ill adults: a randomised, parallel-group, multicentre, single-blind controlled trial. Lancet Respir Med 2015;3(12):943-52. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00418-X.  
[32] Jensen GL, Cederholm T, Ballesteros-Pomar MD, Blaauw R, Correia M, Cuerda C, et al. Guidance for assessment of the inflammation etiologic criterion for the GLIM diagnosis of malnutrition: a modified Delphi approach. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2024;48(2):145-54. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpen.2590.  
[33] Cederholm T, Jensen GL, Ballesteros-Pomar MD, Blaauw R, Correia M, Cuerda C, et al. Guidance for assessment of the inflammation etiologic criterion for the GLIM diagnosis of malnutrition: a modified Delphi approach. Clin Nutr 2024;43(5):1025-32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clnu.2023.11.026.  
[34] Lopez-Delgado JC, Patel JJ, Stoppe C, McClave SA. Considerations for medical nutrition therapy management of the critically ill patient with hematological malignancies: a narrative review. Nutr Clin Pract 2024;39(4):800-14. https://doi.org/10.1002/ncp.11152.  
[35] Paris M, Mourtzakis M. Assessment of skeletal muscle mass in critically ill patients: considerations for the utility of computed tomography imaging and ultrasonography. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2016;19(2):125-30. https://doi.org/10.1097/MCO.000000000000259.  
[36] Sheean PM, Peterson SJ, Gomez Perez S, Troy KL, Patel A, Sclamberg JS, et al. The prevalence of sarcopenia in patients with respiratory failure classified as normally nourished using computed tomography and subjective global assessment. J Parenter Enter Nutr 2014;38(7):873-9. https://doi.org/10.1177/0148607113500308.  
[37] Donini LM, Busetto L, Bischoff SC, Cederholm T, Ballesteros-Pomar MD, Batsis JA, et al. Definition and diagnostic criteria for sarcopenic obesity: ESPEN