# Review - Incontinence

# European Association of Urology Guidelines on Male Urinary Incontinence

Mauro Gacci a,b,\*, Vasileios I. Sakalis c, Markos Karavitakis d, Jean- Nicolas Cornu e, Christian Gratzke f, Thomas R.W. Herrmann g, Iason Kyriazis h, Sachin Malde i, Charalampos Mamoulakis d, Malte Rieken j, Natasha Schouten k, Emma J. Smith k, Mark J. Speakman i, Kari A.O. Tikkinen m,n, Stavros Gravas o

a Unit of Urological Robotic Surgery and Renal Transplantation, University of Florence, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy; b Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; c Department of Urology, Agios Pavlos General Hospital of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece; d Department of Urology, University General Hospital of Heraklion, University of Crete Medical School, Heraklion, Crete, Greece; e Department of Urology, CHU Hopitaux de Rouen - Hopitaix Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France; f Department of Urology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; g Department of Urology, Kantonsspital Frauenfeld, Frauenfeld, Switzerland; h Department of Urology, General University Hospital of Patras, Patras, Greece; i Department of Urology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; j University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland; k European Association of Urology Guidelines Office, Arnhem, The Netherlands; l Department of Urology, Taunton & Somerset Hospital, Taunton, UK; m Department of Urology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; n Department of Surgery, South Korea Central Hospital, Eappeneuranta, Finland; o Department of Urology, Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus

# Article info

Article history: Accepted May 17, 2022

Associate Editor: James Catto

# Keywords:

Male lower urinary tract symptoms Diagnostics Urinary incontinence Stress urinary incontinence Mixed urinary incontinence Urge urinary incontinence Conservative management Pharmacologic management Surgical management European Association of Urology guidelines

# Abstract

Context: Urinary incontinence (UI) is a common condition in elderly men causing a severe worsening of quality of life, and a significant cost for both patients and health systems.

Objective: To report a practical, evidence- based, guideline on definitions, pathophysiology, diagnostic workup, and treatment options for men with different forms of UI.

Evidence acquisition: A comprehensive literature search, limited to studies representing high levels of evidence and published in the English language, was performed. Databases searched included Medline, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Libraries. A level of evidence and a grade of recommendation were assigned.

Evidence synthesis: UI can be classified into stress urinary incontinence (SUI), urge urinary incontinence (UUI), and mixed urinary incontinence. A detailed description of the pathophysiology and diagnostic workup has been reported. Simple clinical interventions, behavioural and physical modifications, and pharmacological treatments comprise the initial management for all kinds of UI. Surgery for SUI includes bolking agents, male sling, and compression devices. Surgery for UUI includes bladder wall injection of botulinum toxin A, sacral nerve stimulation, and cystoplasty/urinary diversion.

Conclusions: This 2022 European Association of Urology guideline summary provides updated information on definition, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment of male UI.

Patient summary: Male urinary incontinence comprises a broad subject area, much of which has been covered for the first time in the literature in a single manuscript. The

European Association of Urology Non- neurogenic Male Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms Guideline Panel has released this new guidance, with the aim to provide updated information for urologists to be able to follow diagnostic and therapeutic indications for optimising patient care.

$\mathfrak{G}$  2022 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of European Association of Urology.

# 1. Introduction

Urinary incontinence (UI) is a common condition in elderly men causing a severe worsening of quality of life (QoL), and a significant cost for both patients and the health care systems [1]. Male UI guidelines was previously covered within the UI guidelines, published for the first time in 2001 and updated in 2017 [2]. The fifth International Consultation on Incontinence, based on the work of 23 committees and 200 experts, included a specific section on male UI and was published in 2013 [3]. Currently, the European Association of Urology (EAU) guidelines on male UI (full text and pocket) can be found at the EAU website Uroweb [4]. The following summary of the 2022 male UI guidelines aims to report a practical, evidence- based, guideline on definitions, pathophysiology, diagnostic workup, and treatment options for men with different forms of UI.

# 2. Evidence acquisition

A comprehensive literature search, limited to the best available evidence and studies published in the English language, was performed. Databases searched included Medline, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Libraries, covering a time frame from May 2017, the previous update cut- off of the EAU UI guidelines to June 24, 2021. The full details of the search strategy are available on the EAU website: https://d56bochluxqnz.cloudfront.net/documents/guideline- appendices/management- of- non- neurogenic- male- luts/Search- strategies- Non- Neurogenic- Male- LUTS- guideline- 2022. pdf.

A total of 1054 unique records were identified, retrieved, and screened for relevance, after a preliminary search, 663 were excluded: 255 due to being female, animal, child, and duplicates; 49 for being protocols; 106 for being on neurogenic UI; and 253 being abstracts that were off topic. Finally, 391 papers were evaluated by the panel members for inclusion in the UI guideline.

A modified GRADE approach was used to evaluate the relevant literature [5], and for each recommendation within the guideline, an accompanying rating of strength is available [6,7]. Additional information can be found online at the EAU website: http://www.uroweb.org/guideline/.

# 3. Evidence synthesis

# 3.1. Definitions and epidemiology

UI is defined as an unintentional loss of urine and has a reported prevalence of  $11\%$  in men aged 60- 64 yr and  $31\%$  in men  $\geq 85$  yr of age, and affects up to  $32\%$  of men with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) [8- 10].

UI can further be classified into three types: stress urinary incontinence (SUI), urge urinary incontinence (UUI), and mixed urinary incontinence (MUI). UUI is the most bothersome urinary symptom [11], and men value improvement in urge incontinence more than other symptoms [12].

The recommendations for the epidemiology and pathophysiology overview of male UI are provided in Table 1.

Overflow UI (urine loss in a small amount in a totally full bladder), postmicturition dribble (urine loss immediately after micturition), nocturnal enuresis (urine loss during sleep), and total incontinence (full inability of the bladder to store any urine) are specific forms of UI that are outside the current scope of this publication.

The increasing prevalence of all male UI by age is mainly due to the impact of UUI rather than SUI. Very few studies have included the impact of ethnicity on the prevalence of male UI [13- 15], demonstrating no difference in the prevalence of any kind of UI across racial/ethnic groups.

# 3.2. Pathophysiology

Male UI is mediated by two anatomically separate units: the internal urethral sphincter (IUS) and the external urethral sphincter (EUS) [3,16]. Physiological male urinary continence depends on the integrity of EUS and/or IUS, the supporting structures, and neural innervation. The EUS is the main determinant of male continence, since men without IUS can still retain urinary continence. Damage to the support mechanism, injury to the pelvic nerve, and detrusor overactivity can all contribute to male UI.

The main risk factors for male UI include advanced age, immobility, urinary tract infections (UITs), diabetes, cognitive impairment, and neurological disease [10,17].

# 3.3. Diagnostic evaluation

Medical history and physical examination of males with UI are the same as for male LUTS, and should allow UI to be categorised into SUI, UUI, or MUI, and to identify other types of UI (overflow UI and, nocturnal enuresis) or those that need rapid referral to an appropriate specialist (eg, pelvic diseases and neurological conditions). The history should include details of the type, timing, and severity of UI; associated voiding; and other urinary symptoms. A physical examination should include an abdominal examination, to detect an enlarged bladder or other abdominal mass, as well as a perineal and digital rectal examination.

Specific validated questionnaires can help quantify UI severity. Moreover, some questionnaires are responsive to change and may be used to measure outcomes, though evi

Table 1 - Epidemiology and pathophysiology overview of male UI  

<table><tr><td>Type</td><td>Definition</td><td>Causes and associated factors</td><td>Pathophysiology</td><td>Clinical presentation</td></tr><tr><td>Stress UI: prevalence &amp;lt;10%</td><td>Urine loss during movement or efforts or in general during increased abdominal pressure</td><td>1. Benign prostatic obstruction surgery
2. Neurogenic condition
3. Pelvic surgery
4. Radical prostatectomy
5. Urethral surgery</td><td>Sphincter deficiency</td><td>Symptoms: UI during physical activity, exercises (eg during coughing, sneezing), no leakage during sleep, no nocturnal enuresis
Vodding diary/pad test: with activity
Cough stress test: leakage can coincide with coughing</td></tr><tr><td>Urge UI: prevalence 40–80%</td><td>Urine loss concomitant or immediately following an urgency episode</td><td>1. Ageing process
2. Anorectal dysfunction/GI disorders
3. Behavioural factors (fluid intake and caffeine consumption)
4. Chronic BPO
5. Idiopathic
6. Intrinsic bladder diseases (cystitis, fibrosis, interstitial cystitis)
7. Metabolic syndrome
8. Neurogenic conditions
9. UTIs</td><td>1. Detrusor overactivity (neurogenic or not)
2. Urothelial stimulation
3. Increased afferent signalling
4. Others (pelvic organ cross talk, bladder wall ischaemia, etc.)</td><td>Symptoms: urgency, usually associated with increased frequency and nocturia
Vodding diary: urgency, frequency, and nocturia</td></tr><tr><td>Mixed UI: prevalence 10–30%</td><td>Any combination of SUI and UUI</td><td>Causes of both SUI and UUI</td><td>Combination of SUI and UUI</td><td>Symptoms: UI as often with physical activity as with a sense of urgency
Vodding diary: varies
Cough stress test: may show leakage with coughing</td></tr></table>

BPO  $=$  benign prostatic obstruction; GI  $=$  gastrointestinal; SUI  $=$  stress urinary incontinence; UI  $=$  urinary incontinence; UTI  $=$  urinary tract infection; UUI  $=$  urge urinary incontinence.

dence on their sensitivity is inconsistent [18- 20]. No evidence was found to indicate whether the use of QoL or condition- specific questionnaires have an impact on the outcome of treatment.

Voiding diaries (also known as micturition time charts, frequency/volume charts, and bladder diaries) are a standardised semiobjective method of measuring symptom severity, including the frequency and extent of UI episodes, voided volume, and  $24 - h$  or nocturnal total urine volume [21]. A number of observational studies have demonstrated a close correlation between the data obtained from voiding diaries and standard symptom evaluation [22- 25]. Another study found that keeping a voiding diary had a therapeutic benefit [26].

Pad tests could quantify the severity of UI and monitor patient's response to treatment, although their usefulness to predict the outcome of treatment is uncertain. Despite this, early postoperative testing with pad tests may predict future continence in men after prostatectomy [10,11].

Postvoid residual (PVR) volume measurement can be applied with caution to men with non- neurogenic UI, as the prevalence, severity, and clinical application of PVR in men with UI are uncertain. Several studies demonstrated that ultrasound (US) measurement of PVR is preferable to catheterisation [27- 32].

Urodynamic testing (multichannel cystometry and videourodynamics) and specific tests of urethral function (urethral pressure profilometry, Valsalva leak point pressure, and retrograde urethral resistance) should be considered on an individual basis, such as in cases when invasive treatment is considered. A Cochrane review showed that the use of urrodynamic tests increased the like lihood of prescribing drugs or avoiding surgery, while there is limited evidence that it should be used for the assessment of postprostatectomy UI [8].

Imaging (US, magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography scan) can improve the understanding of the anatomical and functional abnormalities that may cause UI and thus help its management [12]. In clinical research, imaging can be used to investigate the relationship between the lower urinary tract, the pelvic floor, and the possible treatment outcomes. US and magnetic resonance imaging have largely replaced x- ray imaging.

Dipstick urinalysis may indicate a UTI, proteinuria, haematuria, or glycosuria [13- 16]. UI may occur during symptomatic UTI [33], and existing UI may worsen during a UTI [34]. The rate and severity of UI were, however, unchanged after eradication of asymptomatic bacteriuria in nursing home residents [35].

Recommendations for the overall diagnosis of UI are provided in Table 2.

# 3.4. Conservative treatment

# 3.4.1. Simple clinical interventions

3.4.1. Lifestyle interventions. Modification of lifestyle factors such as obesity, smoking, level of physical activity, and diet may improve UI. Fluid restriction is a common strategy to relieve symptoms. It is proposed that any advice on fluid consumption should be based on 24- h fluid intake and urine output measurement [36,37].

3.4.1.2. Treatment of comorbidities. In patients with multiple comorbidities, optimising the associated disease may

Table 2-Diagnosis  

<table><tr><td>Summary of evidence</td><td>LE</td></tr><tr><td>Validated specific symptom score questionnaires and voiding diaries assist in the screening for and categorisation of UI.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Pad test can be used to quantify the presence and severity of UI, as well as a patient&#x27;s response to treatment.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited evidence that urodynamics and PVR affect treatment choice in men with uncomplicated UI.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Recommendations</td><td>Strength rating</td></tr><tr><td>Take a complete medical history including symptoms and comorbidities, medications, and a focused physical examination in the evaluation of men with UI.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Use a validated symptom score questionnaire, bladder diary, and pad test to assess UI.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Measure PVR in the assessment of UI.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Perform urodynamics for UI when considering invasive treatment.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">LE = level of evidence; PVR = postvoid residual; UI = urinary incontinence.</td></tr></table>

reduce the severity of urinary symptoms [38]. Although drug regimen modification is considered a possible intervention, there is limited supportive evidence [39].

3.4.1.3. Constipation. A multimodal intervention, such as behavioural therapy, assisted toileting, and fluid restriction, reduces UI and constipation incidence in elderly men [40]. However, there is no evidence to show whether treatment of constipation improves UI, although both constipation and UI appear to be improved by certain behavioural interventions.

3.4.1.4. Containment. Containment refers to the use of absorbent pads, urinary catheters, external collection devices, and penile clamps. A systematic review (SR) of six randomised controlled trials (RCTs) found that pads filled with superabsorbent material were superior to standard pads [26]. A randomised crossover trial found that a leaf- shaped type of pad was preferred to rectangular pads in mild UI [41].

A Cochrane review compared different types of indwelling catheters and reported no difference between various materials [42]. An SR reported similar rates in UTI outcome or upper tract changes between the use of suprapubic and urethral catheter drainage; however, patients with suprapubic catheters were less likely to have urethral complications [43]. A Cochrane review found no difference between different types or regimens of intermittent catheterisation [44].

An RCT in 56 men with postprostatectomy incontinence (PPI) compared sheath drainage system, body- worn urinal, penile clamp, and absorbent pads. Most men prefer to use a combination of devices and pads to meet their lifestyle needs. A hinge- type penile clamp was good for short vigorous activities as it was the most secure, least likely to leak, and most discreet clamp, although almost all men described it as uncomfortable or painful [45].

3.4.2. Behavioural and physical modifications 3.4.2.1. Prompted or timed voiding. In prompted voiding, carers rather than the patient initiate the decision to void. Two SRs confirmed the superiority on continence outcomes in comparison with standard care [46,47]. Timed voiding is defined as fixed, predetermined, time intervals between toileting, applicable for those with or without cognitive impairment; however, the evidence comes from two RCTs with inconsistent improvement compared with standard care in cognitively impaired adults [48].

3.4.2.2. Bladder training. Bladder training aims to correct the defective patterns of frequent urination and poor bladder control, and restores patient's confidence in controlling bladder function. The add- on effect of bladder training to anticholinergic therapy may improve urinary frequency and nocturia but not UI [49].

3.4.2.3. Pelvic floor muscle training. An SR demonstrated that pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) alone or in combination with biofeedback and/or electrical stimulation is effective for PPI management. PFMT significantly reduces the time to continence recovery [50]. Another meta- analysis reported that biofeedback and/or pelvic floor muscle electric stimulation significantly improved continence recovery rates at 1- and 3- mo intervals after surgery compared with PFMT alone [51]. However, evidence from a Cochrane review showed no overall benefit at 12 mo after surgery [52]. An RCT compared PFMT with no treatment in men undergoing transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) and reported comparable incontinence rate at 12 mo [53]. By contrast, another RCT demonstrated that PFMT before holmium laser enucleation of the prostate promotes early recovery of continence [54]. Other techniques, such as pilates, oscillating rod, and the combination of biofeedback with electrostimulation and whole- body vibration training, increase pelvic floor muscle strength and promote quick recovery of continence [55- 58].

3.4.2.4. Electrical stimulation. An RCT of men receiving surface or intra- anal electrostimulation reported a significant reduction in UI and improvement in QoL, without any difference between treatment arms [59]. A Cochrane review on electrical stimulation in men with UI concluded that electrical stimulation enhances the effect of PFMT in the short term but not after 6 mo. Electrical stimulation was also more effective than sham stimulation at 6 mo, but not at 12 mo; however, there were more adverse effects including pain and discomfort with electrical stimulation [60].

3.4.2.5. Posterior tibial nerve stimulation. Electrical stimulation of the posterior tibial nerve (PTNS) stimulates the sacral micturition centre via the S2- S4 sacral nerve plexus. Stimulation is done either percutaneously using a fine needle, inserted above the medial aspect of the ankle (P- PTNS), or transcutaneously using surface electrodes (T- PTNS).

A noninferiority RCT comparing T- PTNS with P- PTNS reported significant improvements in daytime frequency, urgency, and UI episodes from baseline at 12 wk, without any difference between treatment arms [61]. Among adverse events, mild pain and discomfort at the puncture site are frequently reported, while haematomas, swelling, leg tingling, and vasovagal reaction are uncommon

Table 3- Conservative treatment  

<table><tr><td>Summary of evidence</td><td>LE</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited evidence that lifestyle interventions (eg, weight reduction, smoking cessation, or diet modification) improve UI in males.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited evidence that improving comorbidities or changing drug regimens for underlying disease improves UI in males.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Pads and/or penile sheaths are palliative options for the management of UI.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Prompted voiding, either alone or as part of a behavioural modification programme, improves continence in elderly, care-dependent people.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>The combination of bladder training with antimuscarinic drugs does not result in greater improvement of UI but may improve frequency and nocturia.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>There is conflicting evidence on whether the addition of bladder training, electrostimulation, or biofeedback increases the effectiveness of PFMT alone.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Preoperative PFMT does not confine additional benefit to men undergoing radical prostatectomy.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Electrical stimulation may add benefit to PFMT up to 6 mo.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Electrical stimulation may improve UI compared with sham up to 6 mo.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited evidence for the effectiveness of PTNS in male population.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>There is no evidence that PTNS cures UUI in male population.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Recommendations</td><td>Strength rating</td></tr><tr><td>Offer lifestyle advice that may improve UI to patients; however, patients should be informed that the evidence for these interventions is lacking.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Review any medication associated with the development or worsening of UI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Use pads and/or penile sheaths as a palliative option for the management of UI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Implement prompt voiding for patients with UI where appropriate.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Offer bladder training as a complementary treatment for UI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Offer pelvic floor muscle training alone or in combination with biofeedback and/or electrostimulation to men undergoing radical prostatectomy to speed up recovery from UI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>LE = level of evidence; PFMT = pelvic floor muscle training; PTNS = posterior tibial nerve stimulation; UI = urinary incontinence; UUI = urge urinary incontinence.</td><td></td></tr></table>

[62,63]. The treatment adherence is generally high at  $89.7\%$  [61]. The main contraindications are the presence of cardiac pacemaker and any skin disease at the site of stimulation.

Recommendations for the overall conservative treatment of UI are provided in Table 3.

# 3.5. Pharmacological treatment

# 3.5.1. Drugs for UI/II

3.5.1. Muscarinic receptor antagonists. The efficacy of antimuscarinic monotherapy in men with overactive bladder (OAB) without bladder outlet obstruction (BOO) have been tested in several trials [64- 69]. Four post hoc analyses of large RCTs on OAB treatment in mixed population, focusing on men without presumed BOO, reported significant improvement in urgency, frequency, and UI episodes [65,70,71]. The TIMES trial reported that tolterodine extended release (ER) monotherapy significantly improved UI episodes but not urgency, International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) total, or QoL score compared with placebo [68]. A significantly greater treatment benefit was observed in the tolterodine ER plus tamsulosin group [68]. However, a further analysis showed that men with prostate- specific antigen levels of  $< 1.3\mathrm{ng / ml}$  might benefit more from antimuscarinics [72].

Antimuscarinics can cause dry mouth (up to  $16\%$ ), constipation (up to  $4\%$ ), micturition difficulties (up to  $2\%$ ), nasopharyngitis (up to  $3\%$ ), and dizziness (up to  $5\%$ ), which explains the high withdrawal rate. Antimuscarinics can impair cognitive functions and thus should be avoided in the elderly, as well as carry the theoretical risk of urinary retention and should be avoided in men with PVR  $>200~\mathrm{ml}$  [66].

3.5.1.2. Beta- 3 agonist. Mirabegron  $50~\mathrm{mg}$  is the first clinically available beta- 3 agonist approved for OAB treatment. Its efficacy has been documented in both sexes. A phase 3 mixed- population trial ( $28\%$  male population) reported that mirabegron improves QoL and patient- reported perception of their condition [73]. Another study including  $>1000$  patients ( $30\%$  male population) reported that the combination of mirabegron  $25 / 50~\mathrm{mg}$  and solifenacin  $5 / 10~\mathrm{mg}$  was superior to monotherapy or placebo in urgency improvement and QoL [74].

The effect of mirabegron add- on therapy to  $\alpha 1$ - blockers has been evaluated. An RCT of men with residual OAB symptoms after tamsulosin  $0.2~\mathrm{mg}$  monotherapy reported that add- on therapy improves OAB symptom score, storage subscore of the IPSS score, urgency and frequency episodes, as well as QoL compared with monotherapy [75]. A prospective analysis on 50 elderly men verified these findings [76]. Another RCT compared mirabegron  $50~\mathrm{mg}$  or fesoterodine  $4~\mathrm{mg}$  add- on therapy with silodosin in men with residual OAB symptoms [77]. At  $3~\mathrm{mo}$ , fesoterodine was superior to mirabegron in OAB symptom score ( $- 2.8$  vs  $- 1.5$ ,  $p = 0.004$ ), IPSS- QoL score ( $- 1.5$  vs  $- 1.1$ ,  $p = 0.04$ ), and OAB symptom- urgency subscore score ( $- 1.5$  vs  $- 0.9$ ,  $p = 0.008$ ). Fesoterodine was also superior in alleviating detrusor overactivity ( $52.6\%$  vs  $28.9\%$ ,  $p = 0.03$ ).

Among common treatment- related adverse events are hypertension, UTIs, headache, and nasopharyngitis [78- 80]. Mirabegron is contraindicated in patients with severe uncontrolled hypertension. Mirabegron does not affect voiding urodynamic parameters compared with placebo and the overall change on PVR, which is small [81]. A pooled analysis of four trials showed that in older men ( $>65~\mathrm{yr}$ ), mirabegron was better tolerated than antimuscarinics [82]. The adherence to mirabegron was significantly longer ( $169~\mathrm{d}$ ) than to tolterodine ( $56~\mathrm{d}$ ) and other antimuscarinics ( $30 - 78~\mathrm{d}$ ;  $p< 0.0001$ ).

# 3.5.2. Drugs for UI

An SR of eight studies evaluating the efficacy of duloxetine in postprostatectomy SUI reported that duloxetine resulted in a mean dry rate of  $58\%$  ( $25 - 89\%$ ), mean improvement in pad number of  $61\%$  ( $12 - 100\%$ ), and mean improvement in 1- h pad weight of  $68\%$  ( $53 - 90\%$ ), at short- term follow- up ( $1 - 9~\mathrm{mo}$ ) [83]. However, mean adverse event rates were high, and treatment was discontinued in  $38\%$  of cases. The overall certainty of the evidence was low due to study heterogeneity and methodological limitations.

Recommendations for the pharmacological treatment of UI are provided in Table 4.

Table 4 - Pharmacological treatment  

<table><tr><td>Summary of evidence</td><td>LE</td></tr><tr><td>Antimuscarinic monotherapy can significantly improve urgency, UUI, and increased daytime frequency.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Mirabegron is superior to placebo and as efficacious as antimuscarinics for the improvement of UUI.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Duloxetine led to a short-term improvement in postprostatectomy SUI symptoms and QoL improvement; however, a significant proportion of men discontinued treatment.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Recommendations</td><td>Strength rating</td></tr><tr><td>Offer antimuscarinic drugs or mirabegron to adults with UUI who failed conservative treatment.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Offer duloxetine to men with SUI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Inform patients about the possible adverse events of duloxetine and that its use is off label for this indication in Europe.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>LE = level of evidence; QoL = quality of life; SUI = stress urinary incontinence; UUI = urge urinary incontinence.</td><td></td></tr></table>

# 3.6. Surgical treatment for SUI

# 3.6.1. Bulking agents

Urethral bulking agents are reserved for men with smallvolume leak and for those unfit for more invasive treatments [84]. They work by adding bulk to the urethra, thus improving the coaptation of a damaged sphincter zone.

There is limited evidence to support the efficacy of bulking agents for PPI. Two SRs reported  $26\%$  short- term cure rate and dry rates between  $0\%$  and  $83\%$  [84,85].An RCT compared their efficacy versus artificial urinary sphincter (AUS) and showed significant difference in continence rates favouring AUS implantation  $72\%$  VS  $23\%$  [86]. A propensity score- matched analysis of bulking agents to transobturator male sling (TiLOOP male) reported failure- free rates of  $15\%$  versus  $77\%$  and satisfaction rate of  $3.8\%$  versus  $71\%$  [87]. Transient dysuria and haematuria are frequently reported, but are self- resolving. The risk of urinary retention and the need for catheterisation are small [84,88]. Allergic reactions and migration to proximal and distal lymph nodes have been described [89- 91].

# 3.6.2. Male slings

Male slings are positioned under the urethra and fixed by a retropubic or transobturator approach. They restore continence by urethral compression and urethral bulb repositioning [92,93]. Slings are classified as adjustable and nonadjustable based on whether the tension is adjusted during or after the procedure. The concept of autologous slings has recently been introduced. Only a few RCTs have assessed the effect of autologous vas deferens sling versus no sling and reported that continence rates were similar [94- 96].

3.6.2.1. Nonadjustable slings. The most widely marketed nonadjustable male slings are the AdVance, the AdVance XP, and the transobturator compressive I- Stop TOMS. These slings are safe and improve continence, but many studies report that the predictors of failure are prior radiation, severity of incontinence, and previous surgeries [97- 99].

In an SR of 34 prospective studies, the overall cure rate was reported to be  $60\%$  for sling and  $56\%$  for AUS, while the 24- h pad use was  $- 3.2$  and  $- 3.8$  respectively. Similar findings were reported by a network meta- analysis that showed comparable efficacy between slings and AUS [100]. A prospective multicentre cohort study, in men after AdVanceXP, demonstrated a durable result over time with a  $57\%$  cure rate,  $25\%$  improvement rate, and  $17\%$  failure rate. By contrast, continence rate deteriorates over time after transobturator I- Stop TOMS; it is reported to be  $38\%$  at 12 mo,  $23\%$  at  $4\mathrm{yr}$  and  $15\%$  at 5 yr [101].

The MASTER trial, a noninferiority RCT comparing incontinence rate after male sling or AUS, reported that  $87\%$  and  $84\%$  respectively, were considered incontinent at  $12\mathrm{mo}$  [102]. However, the authors used a very strict definition of incontinence. The subgroup analysis suggested that AUS is superior to slings in men with a greater degree of incontinence at baseline (pad weight  $>280\mathrm{g}$  or for patients after previous radiotherapy.

Pain and wound infection are the most common complications after male sling insertion [103]. Chronic pain is observed in  $1.3\%$  of patients [103]. Transient voiding dysfunction, such as de novo urgency or urinary retention, occurs in  $4.3 - 10.3\%$  while urethral erosion and explantation rates are low  $(0 - 0.4\%)$  [104- 108].

3.6.2.2. Adjustable slings. Three adjustable slings are commercially available: the Remeex, Argus, and ATOMS systems [109- 111]. Any additional benefit is still questioned, since there is no robust evidence to support adjustability advantage. An SR of the ATOMS system reported  $67\%$  dry rate,  $90\%$  overall improvement, and  $16\%$  complications rate [111]. Another SR reported that ATOMS is superior to the ProACT device in dry rate  $68\%$  vs  $55\%$  overall improvement  $91\%$  vs  $80\%$  satisfaction rate  $87\%$  vs  $56\%$  mean number of filing adjustments (2.4 vs 3.5), and postoperative pad use per day (1.1 vs 2.1) [112]. However, these studies were characterised by inconsistency in follow- up duration and in the definition of treatment outcomes [109,111,113- 116]. The success rate of the Remeex system is reported to be  $70\%$  at 7- yr follow- up, with a low satisfaction rate  $(36\%)$  due to the need for multiple readjustments [109,114]. The success rate of the Argus system has been reported at  $17 - 93\%$  [115,116].

Frequent complications include pain (chronic in  $1.5\%$  of men), urethral erosion  $(10\%)$  and infection [115,116]. The explantation rate is  $10 - 15.8\%$  [97].

# 3.6.3. Compression devices

The compression devices are classified as circumferential and noncircumferential based on how they surround the urethra and exert the compressive effect.

3.6.3.1. Circumferential compressive devices. The AUS is the standard treatment for moderate- to- severe male SUI. Among the available systems, the three- component AMS 800 has the greatest level of evidence and the longest follow- up [117]. Evidence from an SR reported an overall cure rate of  $56\%$  and significant reduction in the number of daily pads (- 3.75) [118]. The social continence rate (from zero to one pad daily) is estimated between  $55\%$  and  $77\%$  [119- 121]. Studies with a follow- up of  $>15$  yr reported a  $17\%$  continence rate and a  $90\%$  subjective satisfaction rate

[122]. Predictive factors for successful outcomes are surgeon's experience, higher surgical volume, and intact bladder compliance [123- 126]. Device infection, mechanical failure, and urethral atrophy are reported in  $8.5\%$ $6.2\%$  and  $7.9\%$  of cases, respectively [127]. The risk of urethral atrophy and/erosion increases after previous radiotherapy, penoscrotal approach, older age, and the longer interval between prostatectomy and incontinence surgery [121,128]. The reported revision rates at 3 yr were  $10-$ $29.1\%$  [119,128- 130]. AUS has a limited lifespan and "maintenance" reoperations are common in the long term.

The data regarding ZSI 375 is limited. A European multicentre trial reported an  $84.4\%$  success rate at  $43\mathrm{mo}$  while long- term follow- up data reported a  $72\%$  success rates [131,132]. The risk of urethral erosion is  $8.2 - 13.3\%$  and the risk of mechanical failure is  $2.2 - 2.5\%$  [131]. Other commercially available devices are the Victo and the Br- SL- AS 904 systems, but the evidence regarding efficacy and safety is still pending [133].

3.6.3.2. Noncircumferential compression device (ProACT). The ProACT system consists of two balloon devices that are introduced under fluoroscopic control transperineally on either side of the bladder neck, close to the vesicourethral anastomotic site. The balloons are filled, and their volume can be adjusted postoperatively.

An SR and meta- analysis of 19 studies on ProACT reported a  $60.2\%$  dry rate, significant reduction of daily pads use (- 3.1), and improved QoL scores [134]. A quasirandomised trial comparing ProACT with male slings found similar improvements in continence rates  $68\%$  VS  $65\%$  [135]. A subgroup analysis of patients with previous radiotherapy showed inferior outcomes (  $46\%$  VS  $68\%$  success rate) and a higher rate of urethral erosion [136].

The most common complication during ProACT implantation is perforation of the bladder and/or urethra  $(5.3\%)$  [137]. The overall revision rate is  $22\%$  and typical causes are erosion  $(3.8\%)$  , device leaking  $(4.1\%)$  and migration  $(6.5\%)$  [134].

Recommendations for surgical treatment of SUI are provided in Table 5.

# 3.7. Surgical treatment for UUI

# 3.7.1. Bladder wall injection of botulinum Toxin A

Onabotulinum toxin A (BoNTA- A) inhibit the neurotransmitter release from cholinergic neurons [137]. BoNTA- A  $100~\mathrm{U}$  is licensed in Europe to treat OAB with persistent or refractory non- neurogenic UUI in adults [138,139]. Robust evidence supports the efficacy of BoNTA- A in idiopathic UUI; however, most studies include mixed or female predominant population.

An RCT randomised females and males to BoNTA- A 100 U intradetrusor injection or placebo [140]. Patients were included if they experienced at least three UUI episodes in a 3- d period and were inadequately managed by anticholinergics. Those receiving BoNTA- A reported a  $50\%$  reduction in UUI episodes per day and improvement of OAB symptoms. In addition,  $23\%$  of the patients in the BoNTA- A arm and  $6.5\%$  in the saline arm were completely dry. A network meta- analysis of 56 RCTs compared the efficacy of BoNTA

Table 5 - Surgical treatment for stress urinary incontinence  

<table><tr><td>Summary of evidence</td><td>LE</td></tr><tr><td>There is very limited evidence that bulking agents are effective for the treatment of PPI.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited short-, medium-, and long-term evidence that fixed transobturator male slings cure or improve PPI in patients with mild-to-moderate incontinence.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Men with severe UI, previous radiotherapy, or transurethral surgery may have less benefit from fixed transobturator male slings.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited evidence that adjustable male slings can cure or improve SUI in men.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>There is no evidence that adjustability offers additional benefit over other types of slings.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>There is no evidence that intraoperative placement of an autologous sling during RARP improves return of continence at 6 mo.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>Primary AUS implantation is effective for cure of SUI in men.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>There are conflicting data on whether previous pelvic radiotherapy affects the outcome of AUS implantation.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>The noncircumferential compression device (ProACT) is effective for the treatment of PPI SUI; however, it is associated with a high failure and complication rate, leading to frequent explantation, particularly after pelvic radiation therapy.</td><td>2b</td></tr><tr><td>The rate of explantation of the AUS due to infection or erosion remains high (up to 24% in some series).</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Recommendations</td><td>Strength rating</td></tr><tr><td>Do not offer bulking agents to men with PPI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Offer nonadjustable transobturator slings to men with mild-to-moderatea PPI.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Inform men that severe incontinence, prior pelvic radiotherapy, or transurethral surgery may worsen the outcome of nonadjustable male sling surgery.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Offer AUS to men with moderate-to-severe SUI. Implantation of AUS or ProACT for men should be offered only in expert centres.</td><td>Strong Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Warn men receiving AUS or ProACT that, although cure can be achieved, there is a high risk of complications, mechanical failure, and the need for explantation.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Do not offer noncircumferential compression device (ProACT) to men who have had pelvic radiotherapy.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>AUS = artificial urinary sphincter; LE = level of evidence; PPI = post-prostatectomy incontinence; RARP = root-assisted radical prostatectomy; SUI = stress urinary incontinence; UI = urinary incontinence.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>a The terms &quot;mild&quot; and &quot;moderate&quot; PPI remain undefined.</td><td></td></tr></table>

A, mirabegron, and anticholinergics in adults with idiopathic OAB, and reported improvement in incontinence episodes in the BoNTA- A 100 U arm and higher odds of achieving dryness compared with pharmacotherapy [141].

A pilot RCT, measuring the effect of BoNTA- A 200 U in men with OAB refractory to anticholinergics, persistent for at least  $3\mathrm{mo}$  after surgery, demonstrated a significant improvement in daily frequency, QoL, and in International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire score compared with placebo [142]. A retrospective trial on BoNTA- A in 65 nonobstructed men with refractory OAB reported significant improvement in Urogenital Distress Inventory- 6 (- 4.2) and Incontinence Impact Questionnaire- 7 (- 6.0) scores, compared with baseline [143].

Urinary retention and UTIs are the most common adverse events after BoNTA- A injection. Other adverse events include haematuria, dysuria, and post- treatment pain [144]. The need for clean intermittent self- catheterisation is estimated at  $7.5\%$  after TURP,  $4.2\%$  after radical prostatectomy, and  $29\%$  in men without prior prostate surgery [145].

Table 6 - Surgical treatment for urge urinary incontinence  

<table><tr><td>Summary of evidence</td><td>LE</td></tr><tr><td>A single treatment session of onabotA (100 U) injected in the bladder wall is more effective than placebo at curing and improving UUI/OAB symptoms and QoL.</td><td>1b</td></tr><tr><td>There is no evidence that repeated injections of onabotA have reduced efficacy, but discontinuation rates are high.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>There is an increased risk of retention and UTIs with onabotA injections.</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Sacral nerve stimulation is effective after failed conservative treatment for OAB/UUI, but no sham controls have been used.</td><td>2a</td></tr><tr><td>There is limited evidence of the effectiveness of augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion in treatment of idiopathic OAB.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>The need to perform clean intermittent self-catheterisation following augmentation cystoplasty is high.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Augmentation cystoplasty and urinary diversion are associated with high risks of short- and long-term complications.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>There is no evidence comparing the efficacy or adverse effects of augmentation cystoplasty with those of urinary diversion.</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Recommendations</td><td>Strength rating</td></tr><tr><td>Offer bladder wall injections of onabotA (100 U) to patients with OAB/UUI refractory to medical therapy.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Warn patients of the limited duration of response, risk of urinary tract infection, and possible prolonged need for clean intermittent self-catheterisation (ensure that they are willing and able to do so).</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Offer sacral nerve stimulation to patients who have UUI refractory to medical therapy and are willing to undergo surgical treatment.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Offer augmentation cystoplasty to patients with OAB/UUI who have failed all other treatment options and are able and willing to perform self-catheterisation.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>Inform patients undergoing augmentation cystoplasty of the high risk of complications, the risk of having to perform clean intermittent self-catheterisation, and the need for life-long surveillance.</td><td>Strong</td></tr><tr><td>Offer urinary diversion only to patients who have failed less invasive therapies for the treatment of OAB/UUI, who will accept a stoma.</td><td>Weak</td></tr><tr><td>LE = level of evidence; OAB = overactive bladder; onabotA = onabotulinum</td><td>toxin A QoL = quality of life; UTI = urinary tract infections; UUI = urge urinary incontinence.</td></tr></table>

toxin A QoL  $=$  quality of life; UTI  $=$  urinary tract infections; UUI  $=$  urge urinary incontinence.

3.7.2. Sacral nerve stimulation (SNS; neuromodulation) SNS delivers low- amplitude electrical impulses to the sacral nerve roots via an electrode, and by neural activity modulation, it stabilises bladder electrical activity through an unknown mechanism. An SR and meta- analysis compared the effectiveness of SNS with that of BoNTA- A and reported comparable efficacy at 6- mo follow- up. The main complications after SNS are pain at the implant site  $(13 - 42\%)$ , lead migration  $(4.0 - 21\%)$ , leg or back pain  $(3.0 - 18\%)$ , and wound infection  $(5.7 - 6.7\%)$ . Surgical revision is required in  $29 - 33\%$  of patients due to device malfunction, battery, or device replacement or lead migration [146].

# 3.7.3. Cystoplasty/urinary diversion

Augmentation cystoplasty involves the interposition of a detubularised bowel segment into the bivalved bladder aiming to increase bladder capacity and reduce OAB symptoms. Urinary diversion remains a reconstructive option for patients with intractable UI after multiple pelvic procedures, radiotherapy, or pelvic pathology leading to irreversible sphincteric incompetence or fistula formation.

They are major urological operations that are utilised when other measures have failed.

A retrospective series on patients after cystoplasty reported  $93\%$  continence rate in non- neurogenic population and  $78\%$  in neurogenic population that could reach  $90\%$  when an AUS was implanted [147]. A small prospective mixed- gender trial reported high patient satisfaction rates with augmentation cystoplasty versus onabotA therapy [148].

Early postoperative complications include infection, bowel obstruction, bleeding, and cardiorespiratory complications. Long- term complications include metabolic disturbances (hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis), change in bowel habits, increased mucus production, stone formation, bladder perforation, and rarely bladder cancer [149]. After augmentation cystoplasty, the majority of patients will depend on self- catheterisation, while those with urinary conduit will depend on lifelong urine bags.

Recommendations for surgical treatment of UUI are provided in Table 6.

# 4. Conclusions

Non- neurogenic male UI comprises a broad subject area, much of which has been covered for the first time in the non- neurogenic male LUTS guidelines. This article provides an overview of the management pathway from general diagnostics in UI through conservative, pharmacological, and surgical treatment options.

Author contributions: Mauro Gacci had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.

Study concept and design: Gacci, Sakalis, Karavitakis, Cornu, Gratzke, Herrmann, Kyriazis, Malde, Mamoulakis, Rieken, Schouten, Smith, Speakman, Tikkinen, Gravas.

Acquisition of data: Schouten, Smith.

Analysis and interpretation of data: Gacci, Sakalis, Karavitakis, Cornu, Gratzke, Herrmann, Kyriazis, Malde, Mamoulakis, Rieken, Schouten, Smith, Speakman, Tikkinen, Gravas.

Drafting of the manuscript: Gacci, Sakalis, Karavitakis.

Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Gacci, Sakalis, Karavitakis, Cornu, Gratzke, Herrmann, Kyriazis, Malde, Mamoulakis, Rieken, Schouten, Smith, Speakman, Tikkinen, Gravas.

Statistical analysis: None.

Obtaining funding: None.

Administrative, technical, or material support: Gacci, Sakalis, Karavitakis. Supervision: Gacci.

Other: None.

Financial disclosures: Mauro Gacci certifies that all conflicts of interest, including specific financial interests and relationships and affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript (eg, employment/affiliation, grants or funding, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, royalties, or patents filed, received, or pending), are the following: Dr. M. Gacci has received fellowship and travel grants from Lilly, Bayer, Pfizer, Ibsa, GSK, Astellas, Pierre Fabre, Konpharma, Recordati; has received speaker honorarium from CJK, Lilly, Recordati, Pierre Fabre, Ferring, Berlin- Chemie Menarini, Astel-

las, and Teleflex Medical S.R.L., and participated in clinical trials by Lilly, Ibsa, Astellas, and Institut de Recherche de Pierre Fabre. Professor S. Gravas is a company consultant for Astellas and GSK; has received speaker honoraria from Astellas, Pierre Fabre, and Ferring; and has paid for access to the results of an independent study. Professor J.- N.L. Cornu is a company consultant for Boston Scientific, Astellas, Medtronic, Mundipharma, and STIMULI Technology (French); has received speaker honorarium from Astellas, Pierre Fabre, Medicament, Recordati, Pfizer, Medtronic, and Boston Scientific; has participated in clinical trials by Astellas, Coloplast, Allergan, Ipsen, Medtronic, IXALTIS, COUSIN Biotech, and GT Urological; received fellowship and travel grants from Pierre Fabre Medicament, and Recordati; and received research support grants from Medtronic. Professor Dr. C. Gratzke is a company consultant for Astellas, GSK, Bayer, STEBA, and MSD; received speaker honorarium from Astellas, Pfizer, Recordati, Bayer, IPSEN, Janssen, and Amgen; received research grants from Recordati; and participated in clinical trials by Astellas, NeoTract, and MediTate. Professor Dr. T. Herrmann is a company consultant for Karl Storz SE & Co. KG. Asst. Professor C. Mamoulakis participated in clinical trials for Ferring Pharmaceuticals and GlaxoSmithKline; received company speaker honorarium from Astellas and Ferring; and received fellowship and travel grants from Astellas, Jansen, and Olympus. Asst. Professor M. Rieken is a company consultant for Boston Scientific, Lilly, Novartis, Astellas, Sanofi, and Procept Biorobotics; has received speaker honorarium from Schwabe Pharma; and has received fellowship and travel grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation, Pfizer, Abbvie, GSK, and Amgen. Mr. M. Speakman is a company consultant for ISSECAM IVZW and a shareholder in GlaxoSmithKline, Astra Zeneca, and Pfizer. Dr. I. Kyriazis received company speaker honorarium from Avatera Medical. Mr. S. Malde received company speaker honorarium from Medtronic Ltd. Dr. Vasileios I. Sakalis, Dr. Markos Karavitakis, Natasha Schouten, Dr. Emma J. Smith, and Professor Kari AO. Tikkinen have nothing to disclose.

# Funding/Support and role of the sponsor: None.

# References

[1] Milsom I et al. Epidemiology of urinary incontinence (UI) and other lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), pelvic organ prolapse (POP) and anal incontinence (AI). In: Abrams P, Cardozo L, Khoury S, Wein A, editors. Incontinence. Paris, France: ICUD- EAU; 2013. [2] Burkhard FC, et al. EAU guidelines on urinary incontinence in adults. In: EAU Guidelines. Presented at the annual EAU Congress 2018; Copenhagen, Denmark; 2017. [3] Abrams P, et al. 5th International Consultation on Incontinence; February 2012; Paris, France. [4] Gravas S, et al. EAU guidelines on management of non- neurogenic male lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS), incl. benign prostatic obstruction (BPO). Arnhem, the Netherlands; 2022. [5] Phillips B, et al. Oxford Centre for Evidence- based Medicine: levels of evidence. 1998. Updated by Jeremy Howick; March 2009. [6] Guyatt GH et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on using quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336: 924- 6. [7] Guyatt GH et al. What is "quality of evidence" and why is it important to clinicians? BMJ 2008;336:995- 8. [8] D'Ancona C et al. The International Continence Society (ICS) report on the terminology for adult male lower urinary tract and pelvic floor symptoms and dysfunction. Neurourol Urodyn 2019;38: 433- 77. [9] Helfand BT et al. Prevalence and characteristics of urinary incontinence in a treatment seeking male prospective cohort: results from the LURN study. J Urol 2018;200:397- 404. [10] Shamliyan TA et al. Male urinary incontinence: prevalence, risk factors, and preventive interventions. Rev Urol 2009;11:145- 65. [11] Agarwal A et al. What is the most bothersome lower urinary tract symptom? Individual- and population- level perspectives for both men and women. Eur Urol 2014;65:1211- 7.

[12] Malde S et al. A systematic review of patients' values, preferences, and expectations for the diagnosis and treatment of male lower urinary tract symptoms. Eur Urol 2021;79:796- 809. [13] Anger JT et al. The prevalence of urinary incontinence among community dwelling men: results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination survey. J Urol 2006;176:2103- 8, discussion 2108. [14] Smoger SH et al. Urinary incontinence among male veterans receiving care in primary care clinics. Ann Intern Med 2000;132: 547- 51. [15] Mardon RE et al. Management of urinary incontinence in Medicare managed care beneficiaries: results from the 2004 Medicare Health Outcomes Survey. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1128- 33. [16] Hadley HR et al. The treatment of male urinary incontinence. In: Campbell ME, Walsh PG, editors. Campbell's Urology. London, UK: Saunders; 1986. [17] Hampel C et al. Epidemiology and etiology of male urinary incontinence. Urology A 2010;49:481- 8. [18] Chan SS et al. Responsiveness of the Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory and Pelvic Floor Impact Questionnaire in women undergoing treatment for pelvic floor disorders. Int Urogynecol J 2013;24: 213- 21. [19] Kim J et al. 1576 Is there a relationship between Incontinence Impact Questionnaire 7 score after surgery for stress urinary incontinence and patient- perceived satisfaction and improvement? J Urol 2013;189:e647. [20] Tran MG et al. Patient reported outcome measures in male incontinence surgery. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2014;96:521- 5. [21] Bright E et al. Developing and validating the International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire bladder diary. Eur Urol 2014;66:294- 300. [22] Fayyad AM et al. Urine production and bladder diary measurements in women with type 2 diabetes mellitus and their relation to lower urinary tract symptoms and voiding dysfunction. Neurourol Urodyn 2010;29:354- 8. [23] Homma Y et al. Assessment of overactive bladder symptoms: comparison of 3- day bladder diary and the overactive bladder symptoms score. Urology 2011;77:60- 4. [24] Stav K et al. Women overestimate daytime urinary frequency: the importance of the bladder diary. J Urol 2009;181:2176- 80. [25] van Brummen HJ et al. The association between overactive bladder symptoms and objective parameters from bladder diary and filling cystometry. Neurourol Urodyn 2004;23:38- 42. [26] Burgio KL et al. Behavioral vs drug treatment for urge urinary incontinence in older women: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 1998;280:1995- 2000. [27] Goode PS et al. Measurement of postvoid residual urine with portable transabdominal bladder ultrasound scanner and urethral catheterization. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2000;11: 296- 300. [28] Griffiths DJ et al. Variability of post- void residual urine volume in the elderly. Urol Res 1996;24:23- 6. [29] Marks LS et al. Three- dimensional ultrasound device for rapid determination of bladder volume. Urology 1997;50:341- 8. [30] Nygaard IE. Postvoid residual volume cannot be accurately estimated by bimanual examination. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 1996;7:74- 6. [31] Ouslander JG et al. Use of a portable ultrasound device to measure post- void residual volume among incontinent nursing home residents. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994;42:1189- 92. [32] Stoller ML et al. The accuracy of a catheterized residual urine. J Urol 1989;141:15- 6. [33] Arinzon Z et al. Clinical presentation of urinary tract infection (UTI) differs with aging in women. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2012;55: 145- 7. [34] Moore EE et al. Urinary incontinence and urinary tract infection: temporal relationships in postmenopausal women. Obstet Gynecol 2008;111:317- 23. [35] Ouslander JG et al. Does eradicating bacteriuria affect the severity of chronic urinary incontinence in nursing home residents? Ann Intern Med 1995;122:749- 54. [36] Wyman JF et al. Practical aspects of lifestyle modifications and behavioural interventions in the treatment of overactive bladder and urgency urinary incontinence. Int J Clin Pract 2009;63:1177- 91.

[37] Townsend MK et al. Fluid intake and risk of stress, urgency, and mixed urinary incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2011;205:73. e1- 6. [38] Chughtai B et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for urinary incontinence in home hospice patients. Eur Urol 2019;75:268- 71. [39] Held F et al. Polypharmacy in older adults: Association Rule and Frequent- Set Analysis to evaluate concomitant medication use. Pharmacol Res 2017;115:39- 44. [40] Schnelle JF et al. A controlled trial of an intervention to improve urinary and fecal incontinence and constipation. J Am Geriatr Soc 2010;58:1504- 11. [41] Fader M et al. Absorbent products for urinary/faecal incontinence: a comparative evaluation of key product designs. Health Technol Assess 2008;12, iii- iv, ix- 185. [42] John P et al. Types of indwelling urinary catheters for long- term bladder drainage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;10: CD004997. [43] Hunter KF et al. Long- term bladder drainage: suprapubic catheter versus other methods: a scoping review. Neurourol Urodyn 2013;32:944- 51. [44] Prieto J et al. Catheter designs, techniques and strategies for intermittent catheterisation: what is the evidence for preventing symptomatic UTI and other complications? A Cochrane systematic review. Eur Urol Suppl 2014;13:e762. [45] Macaulay M et al. A trial of devices for urinary incontinence after treatment for prostate cancer. BJU Int 2015;116:432- 42. [46] Eustice S et al. Prompted voiding for the management of urinary incontinence in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;2: CD002113. [47] Flanagan L et al. Systematic review of care intervention studies for the management of incontinence and promotion of continence in older people in care homes with urinary incontinence as the primary focus (1966- 2010). Geriatr Gerontol Int 2012;12:600- 11. [48] Ostaszkiewicz J et al. Habit retraining for the management of urinary incontinence in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;2004:CD002801. [49] Raj RP et al. Anti- cholinergic drugs versus non- drug active therapies for non- neurogenic overactive bladder syndrome in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12:CD003193. [50] Kannan P et al. Effectiveness of pelvic floor muscle training alone and in combination with biofeedback, electrical stimulation, or both compared to control for urinary incontinence in men following prostatectomy: systematic review and meta- analysis. Phys Ther 2018;98:932- 45. [51] Sciarra A et al. A biofeedback- guided programme or pelvic floor muscle electric stimulation can improve early recovery of urinary continence after radical prostatectomy: a meta- analysis and systematic review. Int J Clin Pract 2021;75:e1420. [52] Anderson CA et al. Conservative management for postprostatectomy urinary incontinence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;1: CD001843. [53] Glazener C et al. Urinary incontinence in men after formal one- to- one pelvic- floor muscle training following radical prostatectomy or transurethral resection of the prostate (MAPS): two parallel randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2011;378:328- 37. [54] Anan G, Kaiho Y, Iwamura H, et al. Preoperative pelvic floor muscle exercise for early continence after holmium laser enucleation of the prostate: a randomized controlled study. BMC Urol 2020;20:3. [55] Gomes CS et al. The effects of Pilates method on pelvic floor muscle strength in patients with post- prostatectomy urinary incontinence: a randomized clinical trial. Neurourol Urodyn 2018;37:346- 53. [56] Heydenreich M, Puta C, Gabriel HH, Dietze A, Wright P, Zermann DH. Does trunk muscle training with an oscillating rod improve urinary incontinence after radical prostatectomy? A prospective randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil 2020;34:320- 33. [57] Soto Gonzalez M et al. Early 3- month treatment with comprehensive physical therapy program restores continence in urinary incontinence patients after radical prostatectomy: a randomized controlled trial. Neurourol Urodyn 2020;39:1529- 37. [58] Farzinmehr A et al. A comparative study of whole body vibration training and pelvic floor muscle training on women's stress urinary incontinence: three- month follow- up. J Family Reprod Health 2015;9:147- 54. [59] Pande- Alemany R et al. Efficacy of transcutaneous perineal electrostimulation versus intracavitary anal electrostimulation in the treatment of urinary incontinence after a radical prostatectomy: randomized controlled trial. Neurourol Urodyn 2021;40:1761- 9. [60] Berghmans B et al. Electrical stimulation with non- implanted electrodes for urinary incontinence in men. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;6:CD001202. [61] Ramirez- Garcia I et al. Efficacy of transcutaneous stimulation of the posterior tibial nerve compared to percutaneous stimulation in idiopathic overactive bladder syndrome: randomized control trial. Neurourol Urodyn 2019;38:261- 8. [62] Civic D et al. Re: Randomized trial of percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation versus sham efficacy in the treatment of overactive bladder syndrome: results from the SUmiT trial: K. M. Peters, D. J. Carrico, R. A. Perez- Marrero, A. U. Khan, L. S. Wooldridge, G. L. Davis and S. A. MacDiarmid J Urol 2018; 133: 1438- 1442. J Urol 2011;185:362, author reply 362. [63] Wang M et al. Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation for overactive bladder syndrome: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Int Urogynecol J 2020;31:2457- 71. [64] Dmochowski R, Abrams P, Marschall- Kehrel D, Wang JT, Guan Z. Efficacy and tolerability of tolterodine extended release in male and female patients with overactive bladder. Eur Urol 2007;51:1054- 64, discussion 64. [65] Herschorn S, Jones JS, Oelke M, MacDiarmid S, Wang JT, Guan Z. Efficacy and tolerability of fesoterodine in men with overactive bladder: a pooled analysis of 2 phase III studies. Urology 2010;75: 1149- 55. [66] Hofer K, Burkart M, Jacob G, Jonas U. Safety and efficacy of tolterodine extended release in men with overactive bladder symptoms and presumed non- obstructive benign prostatic hyperplasia. World J Urol 2007;25:627- 33. [67] Roehrborn CG, Abrams P, Rovner ES, Kaplan SA, Herschorn S, Guan Z. Efficacy and tolerability of tolterodine extended- release in men with overactive bladder and urgency urinary incontinence. BJU Int 2006;97:1003- 6. [68] Kaplan SA, Roehrborn CG, Rovner ES, Carlsson M, Bavendam T, Guan Z. Tolterodine and tamsulosin for treatment of men with lower urinary tract symptoms and overactive bladder: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2006;296:2319- 28. [69] Kaplan SA, Walmsley K, Te AE. Tolterodine extended release attenuates lower urinary tract symptoms in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol 2005;174:2273- 5, discussion 5- 6. [70] Chapple CR, Roehrborn CG. A shifted paradigm for the further understanding, evaluation, and treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms in men: focus on the bladder. Eur Urol 2006;49:651- 8. [71] Kaplan SA, Goldfischer ER, Steers WD, Gittelman M, Andoh M, Forero- Schwanhaeuser S. Solifenacin treatment in men with overactive bladder: effects on symptoms and patient- reported outcomes. Aging Male 2010;13:100- 7. [72] Roehrborn CG et al. Effects of serum PSA on efficacy of tolterodine extended release with or without tamsulosin in men with LUTS, including OAB. Urology 2008;72:1061- 7. [73] Sebastianelli A et al. Systematic review and meta- analysis on the efficacy and tolerability of mirabegron for the treatment of storage lower urinary tract symptoms/overactive bladder: comparison with placebo and tolterodine. Int J Urol 2018;25:196- 205. [74] Yamaguchi O et al. Efficacy and safety of the selective beta3- adrenoceptor agonist mirabegron in Japanese patients with overactive bladder: a randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled, dose- finding study. Low Urin Tract Symptoms 2015;7: 84- 92. [75] Drake MJ et al. Efficacy and safety of mirabegron add- on therapy to solifenacin in continent overactive bladder patients with an inadequate response to initial 4- week solifenacin monotherapy: a randomised double- blind multicentre phase 3B study (BESIDE). Eur Urol 2016;70:136- 45. [76] Kuo HC et al. Results of a randomized, double- blind, parallel- group, placebo- and active- controlled, multicenter study of mirabegron, a beta3- adrenoceptor agonist, in patients with overactive bladder in Asia. Neurourol Urodyn 2015;34:685- 92. [77] Abrams P, Kelleher C, Staskin D, et al. Combination treatment with mirabegron and solifenacin in patients with overactive bladder: exploratory responder analyses of efficacy and evaluation of patient- reported outcomes from a randomized, double- blind, factorial, dose- ranging, Phase II study (SYMPHONY). World J Urol 2017;35:827- 38.

[78] Gacci M et al. Tolterodine in the treatment of male LUTS. Curr Urol Rep 2015;16:60. [79] Yokoyama T et al. Naftopidil and propiverine hydrochloride for treatment of male lower urinary tract symptoms suggestive of benign prostatic hyperplasia and concomitant overactive bladder: a prospective randomized controlled study. Scand J Urol Nephrol 2009;43:307- 14. [80] Abrams P et al. Safety and tolerability of tolterodine for the treatment of overactive bladder in men with bladder outlet obstruction. J Urol 2006;175:999- 1004. [81] Yamaguchi O et al. Safety and efficacy of mirabegron as 'add- on' therapy in patients with overactive bladder treated with solifenacin: a post- marketing, open- label study in Japan (MILAI study). BJU Int 2015;116:612- 22. [82] Nitti VM et al. Heredormins and safety of the beta(3)- adrenoceptor agonist mirabegron in males with lower urinary tract symptoms and bladder outlet obstruction. J Urol 2013;190:1320- 7. [83] Kotecha P et al. Use of duloxetine for postprostatectomy stress urinary incontinence: a systematic review. Eur Urol Focus 2021;7: 618- 28. [84] Toia B et al. Bulking for stress urinary incontinence in men: a systematic review. Neurourol Urodyn 2019;38:1804- 11. [85] Choiniere R, et al. Evaluation of benefits and harms of surgical treatments for post- radical prostatectomy urinary incontinence: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Eur Urol Focus. In press. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euf.2021.09.007. [86] Imamoglu MA et al. The comparison of artificial urinary sphincter implantation and endourethral macroplastique injection for the treatment of postprostatectomy incontinence. Eur Urol 2005;47:209- 13. [87] Sacco E et al. A propensity score- matching analysis comparing bulking agent with sling implantation for the treatment of postprostatectomy stress urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn 2019;38:S57- 8. [88] Kowalik CR et al. Results of an innovative bulking agent in patients with stress urinary incontinence who are not optimal candidates for mid- urethral sling surgery. Neurourol Urodyn 2018;37: 339- 45. [89] Stothers L et al. Delayed hypersensitivity and systemic arthralgia following transurethral collagen injection for stress urinary incontinence. J Urol 1998;159:1507- 9. [90] Malizia Jr AA et al. Migration and granulomatous reaction after periurethral injection of polytef (Teflon). JAMA 1984;251: 3277- 81. [91] Pannek J et al. Particle migration after transurethral injection of carbon coated beads for stress urinary incontinence. J Urol 2001;166:1350- 3. [92] Zeif H- J et al. The male sling for post- radical prostatectomy urinary incontinence: urethral compression versus urethral relocation or what is next? Br J Med Surg Urol 2010;3:134- 43. [93] Bole R et al. Narrative review of male urethral sling for postprostatectomy stress incontinence: sling type, patient selection, and clinical applications. Transl Androl Urol 2021;10:2682- 94. [94] Cestari A et al. Retropic and intracorporeal placement of a suburethral autologous sling during robot- assisted radical prostatectomy to improve early urinary continence recovery: preliminary data. J Endourol 2015;29:1379- 85. [95] Kojima Y et al. Bladder neck sling suspension during robot- assisted radical prostatectomy to improve early return of urinary continence: a comparative analysis. Urology 2014;83:632- 9. [96] Nguyen HG et al. A randomized study of intraoperative autologous retropubic urethral sling on urinary control after robotic assisted radical prostatectomy. J Urol 2017;197:369- 75. [97] da Silva LA et al. Adustable sling for the treatment of postprostatectomy urinary incontinence: systematic review and meta- analysis. Einstein (Sao Paulo, Brazil) 2019;17:eRW4508. [98] Bauer RM et al. Results of the AdVance transobturator male sling after radical prostatectomy and adjuvant radiotherapy. Urology 2011;77:474- 9. [99] Wright HC et al. Transobturator sling for post- prostatectomy incontinence: radiation's effect on efficacy/satisfaction. Can J Urol 2017;24:8998- 9002. [100] Guacheta Bomba PL et al. Effectiveness of surgical management with an adjustable sling versus an artificial urinary sphincter in patients with severe urinary postprostatectomy incontinence: a systematic review and network meta- analysis. Ther Adv Urol 2019;11, 1756287219875581. [101] Malval B et al. Long- term outcomes of I- Stop TOMSTM male sling implantation for post- prostatectomy incontinence management. Prog Urol 2017;27:1084- 90. [102] Abrams P et al. Outcomes of a noninferiority randomised controlled trial of surgery for men with urodynamic stress incontinence after prostate surgery (MASTER). Eur Urol 2021;79:812- 23. [103] Meisterhofer K et al. Male slings for postprostatectomy incontinence: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Eur Urol Focus 2020;6:575- 92. [104] Cornu JN et al. Mid- term evaluation of the transobturator male sling for post- prostatectomy incontinence: focus on prognostic factors. BJU Int 2011;108:236- 40. [105] Grabhart M et al. Extended follow- up of the AdVance XP male sling in the treatment of male urinary stress incontinence after 48 months: results of a prospective and multicenter study. Neurourol Urodyn 2019;38:1973- 8. [106] Abrams P et al. Fourth International Consultation on Incontinence Recommendations of the International Scientific Committee: Evaluation and treatment of urinary incontinence, pelvic organ prolapse, and fecal incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn 2010;29: 213- 40. [107] Gill BC et al. Patient perceived effectiveness of a new male sling as treatment for post- prostatectomy incontinence. J Urol 2010;183: 247- 52. [108] Rehder P et al. The 1 year outcome of the transobturator retroluminal repositioning sling in the treatment of male stress urinary incontinence. BJU Int 2010;106:1668- 72. [109] Navalon- Monllor V et al. Long- term follow- up for the treatment of male urinary incontinence with the Remeex system. Actas Urol Esp 2016;40:585- 91. [110] Shamout S et al. Short- term evaluation of the adjustable bulbourethral male sling for post- prostatectomy urinary incontinence. Low Urin Tract Symptoms 2019;11:0111- 6. [111] Esquinas C et al. Effectiveness of Adjustable Transobturator Male System (ATOMS) to treat male stress incontinence: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Adv Ther 2019;36:426- 41. [112] Abellan FJ et al. Systematic review and meta- analysis comparing Adjustable Transobturator Male System (ATOMS) and Adjustable Continence Therapy (ProACT) for male stress incontinence. PLoS One 2019;14:e0225762. [113] Lima JP et al. Argus T versus Advance Sling for postprostatectomy urinary incontinence: a randomized clinical trial. Int Braz J Urol 2016;42:531- 9. [114] Kim J. Long term follow- up of readjustable urethral sling procedure (Remeex System) for male stress urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn 2011;30:209. [115] Bochove- Overgaauw DM et al. An adjustable sling for the treatment of all degrees of male stress urinary incontinence: retrospective evaluation of efficacy and complications after a minimal followup of 14 months. J Urol 2011;185:1363- 8. [116] Dalepiaz O et al. Mid- term complications after placement of the male adjustable suburethral sling: a single center experience. J Urol 2011;186:604- 9. [117] Kretschmer A et al. Surgical treatment of male postprostatectomy incontinence: current concepts. Eur Urol Focus 2017;3:364- 76. [118] Chen Y- C et al. Surgical treatment for urinary incontinence after prostatectomy: a meta- analysis and systematic review. PloS One 2017;12:e0130867. [119] Suh YS et al. Long- term outcomes of primary implantation and revisions of artificial urinary sphincter in men with stress urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn 2017;36:1930- 7. [120] Serra AC et al. Prospective follow- up study of artificial urinary sphincter placement preserving the bulbospongiosus muscle. Neurourol Urodyn 2017;36:1387- 94. [121] Viers BR et al. Long- term quality of life and functional outcomes among primary and secondary artificial urinary sphincter implantations in men with stress urinary incontinence. J Urol 2016;196:838- 43. [122] Leon P et al. Long- term functional outcomes after artificial urinary sphincter implantation in men with stress urinary incontinence. BJU Int 2015;115:951- 7. [123] Trigo Rocha F et al. A prospective study evaluating the efficacy of the artificial sphincter AMS 800 for the treatment of postradical

prostatectomy urinary incontinence and the correlation between preoperative urodynamic and surgical outcomes. Urology 2008;71:85- 9. [124] Lai HH et al. Urodynamic testing in evaluation of postradical prostatectomy. Incontinence before artificial urinary sphincter implantation. Urology 2009;73:1264- 9. [125] Queissert F et al. High/low- volume center experience predicts outcome of AMS 800 in male stress incontinence: results of a large middle European multicenter case series. Neurourol Urodyn 2020;39:1856- 61. [126] Dosanjh A et al. A national study of artificial urinary sphincter and male sling implantation after radical prostatectomy in England. BJU Int 2020;125:467- 75. [127] Van der Aa F et al. The artificial urinary sphincter after a quarter of a noctury: a critical systematic review of its use in male nonneurogenic incontinence. Eur Urol 2013;63:681- 9. [128] Queissert F et al. Artificial urinary sphincter cuff size predicts outcome in male patients treated for stress incontinence: results of a large central European multicenter cohort study. Int Neurourol J 2019;23:219- 25. [129] Kaiho Y et al. Surgical and patient reported outcomes of artificial urinary sphincter implantation: a multicenter, prospective, observational study. J Urol 2018;199:245- 50. [130] Sacco E et al. Artificial urinary sphincter significantly better than fixed sling for moderate post- prostatectomy stress urinary incontinence: a propensity score- matched study. BJU Int 2021;127:229- 37. [131] Ostrowski I et al. Preliminary outcomes of the European multicentre experience of stress urinary incontinence in men. Cent European J Urol 2019;72:263- 9. [132] Llorens C et al. Urinary artificial sphincter ZSI 375 for treatment of stress urinary incontinence in men: 5 and 7 years follow- up report. Urol J 2017;84:263- 6. [133] de Barros EGC et al. Artificial sphincter "BR - SL - AS 904" in the treatment of urinary incontinence after radical prostatectomy: efficacy, practicality and safety in a prospective and multicenter study. Int Braz J Urol 2018;44:1215- 23. [134] Larson T et al. Adjustable continence therapy (ProACT) for the treatment of male stress urinary incontinence: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Neurourol Urodyn 2019;38:2051- 9. [135] Crivellaro S et al. Adjustable continence therapy (ProACT) and bone anchored male sling: comparison of two new treatments of post prostatectomy incontinence. Int J Urol 2008;15:910- 4. [136] Roupret M et al. Management of stress urinary incontinence following prostate surgery with minimally invasive adjustable continence balloon implants: functional results from a single center prospective study. J Urol 2011;186:198- 203. [137] Magistro G et al. New intraprostatic injectables and prostatic urethral lift for male LUTS. Nat Rev Urol 2015;12:461- 71. [138] Duthie JB et al. Botulinum toxin injections for adults with overactive bladder syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;12:CD005493. [139] Mangera A et al. Contemporary management of lower urinary tract disease with botulinum toxin A: a systematic review of Botox (onabotulinumtoxinA) and Dysport (onobotulinumtoxinA). Eur Urol 2011;60:784- 95. [140] Nitti VW et al. OnabotulinumtoxinA for the treatment of patients with overactive bladder and urinary incontinence: results of a phase 3, randomized, placebo controlled trial. J Urol 2013;189:3186- 93. [141] Drake MJ et al. Comparative assessment of the efficacy of onabotulinumtoxinA and oral therapies (anticholinergics and mirabegron) for overactive bladder: a systematic review and network meta- analysis. BJU Int 2017;120:611- 22. [142] Chughtai B et al. Randomized, double- blind, placebo controlled pilot study of intradetrusor injections of onabotulinumtoxinA for the treatment of refractory overactive bladder persisting following surgical management of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Can J Urol 2014;21:7217- 21. [143] Faure Walker NA et al. Onabotulinum toxin A Injections in Men With Refractory Idiopathic Detrusor Overactivity. Urology 2019;123:242- 6. [144] Cui Y et al. Botulinum toxin- A injections for idiopathic overactive bladder: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Urol Int 2013;91:429- 38. [145] Bels J et al. Long- term follow- up of intravesical onabotulinum toxin- A injections in male patients with idiopathic overactive bladder: comparing surgery- naïve patients and patients after prostate surgery. Eur Urol Focus 2021;7:1424- 9. [146] Tutolo M et al. Efficacy and safety of sacral and percutaneous tibial neuromodulation in non- neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction and chronic pelvic pain: a systematic review of the literature. Eur Urol 2018;73:406- 18. [147] Venn SN et al. Long- term results of augmentation cystoplasty. Eur Urol 1998;34(Suppl 1):40- 2. [148] El- Azab AS et al. The satisfaction of patients with refractory idiopathic overactive bladder with onabotulinumtoxinA and augmentation cystoplasty. Arab J Urol 2013;11:344- 9. [149] Hoen L et al. Long- term effectiveness and complication rates of bladder augmentation in patients with neurogenic bladder dysfunction: a systematic review. Neurourol Urodyn 2017;36:1685- 702.