# Original Article

# A revision of JPOS/JASCC clinical guidelines for delirium in adult cancer patients: a summary of recommendation statements

Yoshinobu Matsuda<sup>1</sup>, Hitoshi Tanimukai<sup>2</sup>, Shinichiro Inoue<sup>3</sup>, Takatoshi Hirayama<sup>4</sup>, Yusuke Kanno<sup>5</sup>, Yuichi Kitaura<sup>6</sup>, Shuji Inada<sup>7</sup>, Koji Sugano<sup>8</sup>, Masafumi Yoshimura<sup>9</sup>, Saki Harashima<sup>10</sup>, Saho Wada<sup>11</sup>, Takaaki Hasegawa<sup>12</sup>, Yoshiaki Okamoto<sup>13</sup>, Chikako Dotani<sup>14</sup>, Mari Takeuchi<sup>15</sup>, Jun Kako<sup>16</sup>, Ryoichi Sadahiro<sup>4</sup>, Yasuhiro Kishi<sup>17</sup>, Megumi Uchida<sup>18</sup>, Asao Ogawa<sup>19</sup>, Masatoshi Inagaki<sup>20</sup> and Toru Okuyama<sup>21</sup>*

<sup>1</sup>Department of Psychosomatic Internal Medicine, Kinki- Chuo Chest Medical Center, Sakai, Japan, <sup>2</sup>Faculty of Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, <sup>3</sup>Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Hospital, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Science, Okayama, Japan, <sup>4</sup>Department of Psycho- Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>5</sup>Department of Home Health and Palliative Care Nursing, Graduate School of Health Care Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>6</sup>Department of Psychiatry, Panasonic Health Insurance Organization Matsushita Memorial Hospital, Moriguchi, Japan, <sup>7</sup>Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kindai University, Osaka- Sayama, Japan, <sup>8</sup>Division of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>9</sup>Department of Occupational Therapy, Faculty of Rehabilitation, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, Japan, <sup>10</sup>Department of Stress Sciences and Psychosomatic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>11</sup>Department of Neuropsychiatry, Nippon Medical School Tamanagayama Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>12</sup>Center for Psycho- oncology and Palliative Care, Nagoya City University Hospital, Nagoya, Japan, <sup>13</sup>Department of pharmacy, Ashiya Municipal Hospital, Ashiya, Japan, <sup>14</sup>Department of Pediatrics, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>15</sup>Department of Neuropsychiatry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, <sup>16</sup>College of Nursing Art and Science, University of Hyogo, Akashi, Japan, <sup>17</sup>Department of Psychiatry, Nippon Medical School Musashikosugi Hospital, Kawasaki, Japan, <sup>18</sup>Department of Psychiatry and Cognitive- Behavioral Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan, <sup>19</sup>Division of Psycho- Oncology, Exploratory Oncology Research and Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Kashiwa, Japan, <sup>20</sup>Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Shimane University, Izumo, Japan and <sup>21</sup>Department of Psychiatry/Palliative Care Center, Nagoya City University West Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan

*For reprints and all correspondence: Toru Okuyama, Department of Psychiatry/Palliative Care Center, Nagoya City University West Medical Center, 1- 1- 1, Hirate- cho, Kita- ku, Nagoya 462- 8508, Japan. E- mail: okuyama@med.nagoya- cu.ac.jp

Received 2 February 2023; Editorial Decision 24 April 2023; Accepted 26 April 2023

# Abstract

Objective: The Japanese Psycho- Oncology Society and the Japanese Association of Supportive Care in Cancer have recently revised the clinical practice guidelines for delirium in adult cancer patients. This article reports the process of developing the revised guidelines and summarizes the recommendations made.

Methods: The guidelines were developed in accordance with the Medical Information Network Distribution Service creation procedures. The guideline development group, consisting of multidisciplinary members, created three new clinical questions: non- pharmacological intervention and antipsychotics for the prevention of delirium and trazodone for the management of delirium. In addition, systematic reviews of nine existing clinical questions have been updated. Two independent reviewers reviewed the proposed articles. The certainty of evidence and the strength of the recommendations were graded using the grading system developed by the Medical Information Network Distribution Service, following the concept of The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system. The modified Delphi method was used to validate the recommended statements.

Results: This article provides a compendium of the recommendations along with their rationales, as well as a short summary.

Conclusions: These revised guidelines will be useful for the prevention, assessment and management of delirium in adult cancer patients in Japan.

Key words: cancer, delirium, guidelines, palliative care, psycho- oncology

# Introduction

Delirium is a common neurocognitive syndrome in cancer patients (1). The prevalence of delirium in older patients with advanced lung cancer was  $40\%$  2) and was observed in  $90\%$  of patients with advanced cancer prior to death (3).Delirium is a distressing experience for cancer patients, caregivers and healthcare providers (4,5). Therefore, there is an urgent need for evidence- based delirium management in cancer settings.

The Japan Psycho- Oncology Society and Japanese Association of Supportive Care in Cancer first published their clinical guidelines on delirium in adult cancer patients in 2019 (6). The initial version of the guidelines included nine clinical questions (CQs) (Table 1) and identified the need for additional CQs to address prophylaxis interventions and the use of trazodone for delirium in the revised guidelines to be developed in the future. Thus, one of the major purposes of this revision was to create new clinical questions regarding delirium prevention. Growing evidence indicates that non- pharmacological and pharmacological interventions have the potential to prevent delirium in non- cancer settings. We thus considered whether these two prevention strategies should be recommended in cancer settings. We included the use of antipsychotics for prevention as a CQ because there were more studies on antipsychotics for preventing delirium in non- cancer patients compared with novel types of hypnotics (7). Another new CQ is whether trazodone can be used for the treatment of delirium. Trazodone is an anti- depressant with sedative effects. Although it has been used to treat delirium in Japan (8), existing delirium guidelines have limited mention of trazodone. In this article, we describe the process of developing these guidelines and present a summary of the recommendations for delirium in adult cancer patients, along with the rationales for each.

# Methods

# Development process

The guidelines were prepared in accordance with the 2017 Medical Information Network Distribution Service system (9). The guideline development group consisted of multidisciplinary members (13 psychiatrists, 3 psychosomatic physicians, 1 palliative care physician, 1 oncologist, 1 pharmacist, 1 psychologist and 2 nurses).

The guidelines were prepared in accordance with the 2017 Medical Information Network Distribution Service system (9). The guideline development group consisted of multidisciplinary members (13 psychiatrists, 3 psychosomatic physicians, 1 palliative care physician, 1 oncologist, 1 pharmacist, 1 psychologist and 2 nurses). The guideline development group formulated 12 CQs to be answered. Among them, five CQs (CQ 1, 3, 4, 10, 11 and 12) were considered background questions; hence, the strength of recommendation and certainty of the evidence were not produced. Subsequently, we conducted a systematic literature search for each CQ in four electronic databases (PubMed, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trial, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and Ichushi- Web of the Japan Medical Abstracts Society), with searches limited to articles published prior to 31 January 2020 and written in English or Japanese. The search terms used in PubMed are listed in Supplementary Table 1. In cases where a limited number of articles (or none) investigating delirium in cancer patients were identified, we conducted additional searches extended to articles concerning delirium in non- cancer patients. We identified relevant studies in the following two steps. First, two members of the taskforce independently reviewed each identified abstract to select studies that met the rough eligibility criteria for each CQ (not shown). Second, full- text articles related to studies identified during Step 1 were screened according to strict eligibility criteria. Additional articles were identified using a manual search. Although we did not conduct a systematic review of articles published after 31 January 2020, we incorporated relevant articles for each CQ until May 2021.

# Drafting recommendations and the Delphi method

Two to three member teams from the taskforce drafted the recommendation statements for each CQ. The modified Delphi method was used to validate these statements. The Delphi rounds were conducted by 10 representatives from other specialties (i.e. two palliative care physicians, one pharmacist, three oncologists, one home care physician, one psychiatrist, one nurse and one representative of a cancer patient group). The representatives were asked to assess the appropriateness of the recommendation statement, strength of recommendations, certainty of the evidence and explanatory statement of each CQ using an online system that utilized the nine- point Likert scale, ranging from one (inappropriate) to nine (appropriate). The pre- defined criteria determining the appropriateness were a median value of  $\geq 8$  and a difference between the maximum and minimum value of  $\leq 5$ . After two Delphi rounds and an external review conducted by three external reviewers (one palliative care physician, one

raarrrrrrrrrrarrre

o e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">CQ</td><td rowspan="2">2022</td><td colspan="11">2019</td></tr><tr><td>Number of included studies</td><td>Recommendation</td><td>Strength of recommendation</td><td>Certainty of evidence</td><td>Number of included studies</td><td>Recommendation</td><td>Strength of recommendation</td><td>Level of evidence</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Non-pharmacological intervention for prevention of delirium (BQ)</td><td>10</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>Not existed in the 2019</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Antipsychotics for prevention of delirium</td><td>2</td><td>Suggested not to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>C (weak)</td><td>-</td><td>Not existed in the 2019</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Assessment tools for delirium (BQ)</td><td>14</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>6</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Precipitating factors of delirium (BQ)</td><td>29</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>6</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Antipsychotics alone for the treatment of delirium</td><td>13</td><td>Suggested to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>C (weak)</td><td>6</td><td>Suggested to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>C (weak)</td><td>C (low)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>Trazodone alone for the treatment of delirium</td><td>1</td><td>Suggested to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>D (very weak)</td><td>-</td><td>Not existed in the 2019</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>Hydroxyzine alone for the treatment of delirium</td><td>0</td><td>Suggested not to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>D (very weak)</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>Benzodiazepine alone for the treatment of delirium</td><td>3</td><td>Suggested not to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>C (weak)</td><td>0</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>Opioid switching for the treatment of delirium</td><td>7</td><td>Suggested to be performed</td><td>2 (weak)</td><td>C (weak)</td><td>7</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>Non-pharmacological intervention for the treatment of delirium (BQ)</td><td>7</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>Interventions for delirium in terminally ill cancer patients (BQ)</td><td>11</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>9</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Support preferred by family of cancer patients with delirium (BQ)</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>1</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr></table>

Table 2. Strength of recommendations  

<table><tr><td>1 (strong)</td><td>Strong recommendation to do (or not to do). 
The benefit of the recommended treatment certainly overweighs the harm or burden. 
In the guideline, statements are described as ‘recommend’.</td></tr><tr><td>2 (weak)</td><td>Weak recommendation to do (or not to do). 
The benefit of the recommended treatment may be closely balanced with the harm or burden. 
In the guideline, statements are described as ‘suggest’.</td></tr></table>

Table 3. Certainty of the evidence  

<table><tr><td>A (strong)</td><td>There is strong confidence in the adequacy of the effect estimates to support the recommendation.</td></tr><tr><td>B (moderate)</td><td>There is moderate confidence in the adequacy of the effect estimates to support the recommendation.</td></tr><tr><td>C (weak)</td><td>There is limited confidence in the adequacy of the effect estimates to support the recommendation.</td></tr><tr><td>D (very weak)</td><td>There is little confidence in the adequacy of the effect estimates to support the recommendation.</td></tr></table>

oncologist and one representative of a cancer patient group), the final version of the recommendation statements was approved.

# The strength of recommendations and certainty of the evidence

The strength of the recommendations and certainty of the evidence was graded using the grading system developed by the Medical Information Network Distribution Service, following the concepts of The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system (Tables 2 and 3).

# Results

The number of included studies, recommendations, strength of recommendation and certainty of evidence/level of the evidence in the previous (2019) and revised (2022) guidelines are summarized in Table 3.

# CQ1. Which non-pharmacological interventions are recommended to prevent delirium in cancer patients? Recommendations

Non- pharmacologic therapies to prevent the onset of delirium in cancer patients include multicomponent interventions and bright light therapy for post- operative delirium and delirium in the cancer treatment phase. Multicomponent non- pharmacological interventions commonly consist of education about delirium for healthcare providers, patients and their families; a multidisciplinary and specialist team approach; symptom management, including pain, dehydration and constipation; environmental adjustments (date/time awareness and music); and delirium risk assessment and removal of risk factors including medication modification and adjustment.

There were 10 studies on this CQ.

Nakagawa et al. conducted an observational study on 102 patients who underwent head and neck reconstructive surgery to determine whether early postoperative bed release significantly reduced the incidence of postoperative delirium (10). They found that the incidence of delirium was significantly lower in the group of patients who began mobilization on the second postoperative day than in the group of patients who began mobilization on the third postoperative day or the third to fifth postoperative days. Taguchi et al. conducted a randomized controlled trial (RCT) to determine whether postoperative bright light therapy significantly reduced the incidence of postoperative delirium compared with usual care in 10 patients with oesophageal cancer (11). The intervention group received  $5000\mathrm{lx}$  for  $2\mathrm{h}$  in the morning on days 2- 5 postoperatively. The control group received their usual care in a private intensive care unit (ICU) room with 600 or  $1000\mathrm{lx}$  lighting. The intervention group had a significantly lower delirium score compared with the control group. Gagnon et al. conducted a non- RCT to determine whether a multicomponent intervention significantly reduced the incidence of terminal delirium compared with usual care in 1516 terminally ill cancer patients receiving specialized palliative care services at seven palliative care centres (12). The intervention included the following: upon admission, nurses utilized a delirium risk assessment form to assess the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status (PS); presence of brain or meningeal metastases; presence of metabolic disturbances; the dose of opioid analgesics; the dose of benzodiazepines; and use of anticholinergics, corticosteroids or anticonvulsants. The form was shared with the physician and recorded in the patient's medical records. The physician made changes in the medications to minimize the risk of delirium. Nurses also communicated the date, time and location to prevent patient disorientation. Family members were educated on delirium prevention. There were no significant differences in the incidence of delirium between the two groups after adjustment for length of hospital stay, ECOG PS and history of delirium. Hempenius et al. conducted an RCT among 297 elderly cancer patients to determine whether a multicomponent intervention by a geriatric team significantly improved the incidence of postoperative delirium compared with the usual care (13). In the intervention group, a preoperative Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment by a geriatrician was performed to assess the risk of delirium, and a customized treatment plan was developed for each patient. During the hospitalization period, a geriatric nurse also conducted a daily risk assessment of delirium using a delirium checklist, and if symptoms were suspected, they were discussed with the treating physician. The intervention group showed no

significant reduction in the incidence of delirium from postoperative days 1- 10 compared with the control group. Hempenius et al. conducted a follow- up study to determine the long- term effects of intervention; however, they found no significant observed difference between the two groups in terms of mortality or readmission rates at 3 months postoperatively (14). Guo et al. conducted an RCT to determine whether a multicomponent non- pharmacologic intervention significantly reduced the incidence of postoperative delirium compared with usual care in 182 elderly patients with oral cancer (15). The intervention included psychological training and guidance from a geriatric specialist for healthcare providers. Next, after psychological training for preoperative patients, they were transferred to the surgical ICU, where they were informed about the postoperative care environment, ventilators, catheters and other equipment. After the surgery, a music player was placed at the bedside to allow the patients to listen to music according to their preferences, in addition to confirming the date, time and location using a calendar and explaining the catheter being inserted. Compared with the control group, the intervention group showed a significantly lower incidence of delirium from the first to the third postoperative day. Chen et al. conducted a cluster RCT to investigate whether a multicomponent non- pharmacologic intervention significantly reduced the incidence of postoperative delirium compared with usual care in 377 elderly patients (345 cancer patients) undergoing abdominal surgery (16). Nurses in the intervention ward received training in non- pharmacologic therapies and three protocols: orienting communication, oral and nutritional assistance and early mobilization. The intervention group showed a significantly lower incidence of delirium and length of hospital stay than the control group. Ogawa et al. conducted a retrospective before- after study to determine whether the introduction of a multidisciplinary delirium programme significantly reduced the incidence of delirium compared with the pre- implementation of the programme in 7977 hospitalized cancer patients undergoing cancer treatment (17). The intervention programme consisted of an educational package for nurses, physicians and pharmacists; routine screening of patients at high risk for delirium; planning of delirium prevention in patients at risk for delirium; interdisciplinary approach; scheduled assessment of delirium signs by ward nurses; and delirium management and treatment. The incidence of delirium after the implementation of the programme was significantly lower than before. Wang et al. conducted a cluster RCT to determine whether a multicomponent non- pharmacologic intervention significantly reduced the incidence of postoperative delirium compared with usual care in 281 elderly patients (270 cancer patients) (18). In the intervention group, all patients received three universal protocols: orientation, therapeutic activities and early mobilization. In addition, patients at high risk for delirium underwent eight targeted protocols: pain management, sleep enhancement, nutrition assistance/aspiration prevention, fluid repletion/constipation, vision/hearing enhancement, hypoxia improvement, catheter- associated urinary tract infection prevention and multiple medication management. Family members were also educated on these interventions. The intervention group had a significantly lower incidence of delirium up to 7 days postoperatively than the control group. Hosie et al. conducted a cluster RCT to determine whether a multicomponent non- pharmacological intervention significantly reduced the incidence of delirium compared with usual care in 65 patients with advanced cancer admitted to a palliative care unit (PCU) (19). The intervention included eating and drinking, sleep, exercise, reorientation, vision and hearing and family partnerships. Compared with the control group, the intervention group showed no significant differences in the incidence or severity of delirium within 7 days of admission.

group showed no significant differences in the incidence or severity of delirium within 7 days of admission.

In summary, non- pharmacological interventions are effective in the prevention of postoperative delirium and delirium in the cancer treatment phase in multiple studies. However, its effectiveness in preventing terminal delirium has not been proven. Non- pharmacological interventions are broadly classified into multicomponent interventions and bright light therapy. Multicomponent interventions included education about delirium for healthcare providers, patients and their families; a multidisciplinary and specialist team approach; symptom management; environmental adjustments; delirium risk assessment and removal of risk factors.

# CQ2. Are antipsychotics recommended to prevent delirium in patients with cancer?

# Recommendations

Antipsychotics are suggested not to be used to prevent delirium in patients with cancer (2C).

There were two studies on this CQ.

Arii et al. conducted a retrospective study of 129 terminally ill cancer patients admitted to a palliative care ward to determine whether there was a significant difference in the incidence of delirium between patients who received oral haloperidol and those who did not (20). There was no significant difference in the incidence of delirium between patients who received haloperidol and those who did not. Khan et al. conducted an RCT to determine whether intravenous haloperidol significantly improved the incidence of postoperative delirium compared with a placebo in 135 patients undergoing thoracic surgery (21). There was no significant difference in the incidence of postoperative delirium between the haloperidol and placebo groups.

We did not find evidence to support the use of antipsychotics to reduce the incidence of postoperative delirium in patients with cancer. Thus, we suggest that antipsychotics are not to be used in cancer patients with delirium.

# CQ3. Which assessment tools for delirium are recommended for patients with cancer?

# Recommendations

Although the Nursing Delirium Screening Scale (NuDESC), the Delirium Observation Screening Scale (DOS) and other screening instruments for delirium in cancer patients have been reported, no specific instruments can be recommended. Identification methods such as the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM), Memorial Delirium Assessment Scale (MDAS), Delirium Rating Scale- Revised- 98 (DRSR- 98), Communication Capacity Scale (CCS) and Agitation Distress Scale (ADS) have been reported, but no specific measures can be recommended. DMS is a diagnostic method for the subtypes. Severity rating scales include the MDAS and DRS- R- 98 in general and the CCS and ADS in particular for physically severely ill patients.

There were 14 studies on this CQ.

# Assessment tools for screening of delirium

Sakurai et al. evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of the Delirium, Depression, and Dementia Screening Tool (3DST) in 57 patients

with cancer admitted to a palliative care ward and reported a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value of  $53\%$ ,  $95\%$ ,  $80\%$  and  $85\%$ , respectively (22). De la Cruz et al. evaluated the usefulness of NuDESC by caregivers in hospice inpatients with terminal cancer who were assessed using the MDAS and Richmond Agitation- Sedation Scale (RASS) 7 days before death (23). With a cut- off value of  $7 / 6$  on the MDAS, 34 patients  $(44\%)$  were diagnosed with delirium, with a sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of  $35\%$ ,  $80\%$ ,  $58\%$  and  $61\%$ , respectively, for Nu- DESC by the caregiver. Neefjes et al. examined the reliability of DOS as a screening tool in hospitalized patients with advanced cancer and found that the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were  $>99.9\%$ ,  $99.6\%$ ,  $94.6\%$  and  $>99.9\%$  respectively (24).

# Assessment tools for identification of delirium

Breitbart et al. evaluated MDAS as a scale to identify delirium in 33 hospitalized cancer patients and found that the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were  $70.59\%$ ,  $93.75\%$ ,  $92.3\%$  and  $75.0\%$ , respectively, when the cut- off value was  $13 / 12$  (25). In a study involving 48 cancer patients and three patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome who were admitted to an oncology ward and met DSM- IV diagnostic criteria for delirium, the  $13 / 12$  cut- off value correctly discriminated moderate to severe delirium. However, it did not correctly discriminate mild delirium except in one patient. Lawlor et al. examined the reliability and validity of MDAS ratings in 104 cancer patients admitted to a PCU (26). The findings showed that the sensitivity and specificity were  $97\%$  and  $95\%$ , respectively, when the MDAS cut- off value was  $7 / 6$ . Grassi et al. explored the effectiveness of the DRS in evaluating delirium in 105 cancer patients and found that when a cut- off value of  $10 / 9$  was used in DRS, the sensitivity and specificity were  $95\%$  and  $61\%$ , respectively. Similarly, when a cut- off value of  $13 / 12$  was applied in MDAS, the sensitivity and specificity were  $68\%$  and  $945$ , respectively (27). Bosisio et al. analysed the same data set as Grassi et al. and assessed the ability of all the DRS and MDAS items to distinguish patients with delirium from those without (28). The distribution of MDAS item scores was significantly different for all items in MDAS. In contrast, the distribution of the DRS item scores in 'hallucinations' and 'lability of mood' were not significantly different in DRS. In a pilot study, Ryan et al. examined the reliability of CAM administered by non- psychiatrists and found that the sensitivity and specificity were  $50\%$  and  $100\%$ , respectively, in 32 patients admitted to a PCU (30 of whom had cancer) (29). In a final study, they found that the sensitivity and specificity were  $88\%$  and  $100\%$ , respectively, in 52 patients admitted to a PCU (46 of whom had cancer). Barahona et al. examined the validity of the Spanish version of the MDAS as a measure of delirium identification in 67 PCU admissions for advanced cancer and found that the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were  $92.6\%$ ,  $71.8\%$ ,  $70.1\%$  and  $99.3\%$ , respectively, when the cut- off value was  $7 / 6$  (30). Kang et al. examined the validity of the Korean version of the MDAS as a measure of delirium identification in 102 patients with advanced cancer in a PCU and found that the sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were  $95.8\%$ ,  $92.1\%$ ,  $79.3\%$  and  $98.6\%$ , respectively, when the cut- off value was  $9 / 8$  (31).

Assessment tools for diagnosis of subtypes of delirium Meagher et al. developed the Delirium Motoric Checklist and examined which items were associated with hyperactive or hypoactive delirium, proposing criteria for hyperactive and hypoactive motor subtypes (32).

# Assessment tools for the severity of delirium

Breitbart et al. conducted a prospective observational study of 48 cancer patients and three patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome who were admitted to an oncology ward and met the DSM- IV diagnostic criteria for delirium, using the MDAS, DRS, Mini- Mental State Examination (MMSE) and clinician assessment (25). The results showed a significant association between MDAS scores and clinicians' assessment of disease severity. Morita et al. examined whether CCS and ADS are valid and reliable tools to measure the severity of delirium in 30 terminally ill cancer patients with delirium and found the scales to be acceptable (33). Noguera et al. examined the reliability and validity of the Spanish version of the MDAS as a scale to measure the severity of delirium (34). They found high correlation coefficients between the MDAS and DRS- R- 98 and between the MDAS and MMSE. Kang et al. examined the validity of the Korean version of the MDAS and found high values for Cronbach's alpha coefficient, correlation coefficient with the DRS- R- 98 and inter- rater correlation coefficient for the total MDAS score (31).

# Systematic reviews

Leonard et al. conducted a systematic review (SR) of studies regarding assessment tools for delirium in the palliative care (35). The group reported that the Confusion Assessment Scale (CAM), MDAS, Bedside Confusion Scale, CCS and ADS are validated assessment tools for palliative care. Furthermore, their findings revealed that the CAM, Nursing Delirium Screening Scale (Nu- DESC) and Single Question in Delirium are appropriate screening tools for delirium, while the MDAS and DRS- R- 98 are appropriate for assessing the severity of delirium.

We did not identify tools for screening delirium with sufficient ability, the Japanese version of which has been validated. Although CAM and SQid were recommended in an SR conducted by Leonald et al., no studies have shown their usefulness as screening tools for delirium in cancer patients. In addition, the reliability and validity of the Japanese versions of the Nu- DESC, DOS and SQid have not been evaluated. 3DST was reported in only one study in patients with cancer, and its sensitivity was not adequate. Regarding tools for identification, although several studies have examined the usefulness of the MDAS and DRS in identifying delirium, we concluded that their usefulness has not been established. We identified only one study on CAM that showed good sensitivity and specificity for identifying delirium in a palliative care setting. Regarding tools for the diagnosis of subtypes of delirium, the diagnostic criteria by Meagher et al. are currently the most established. Regarding tools for severity, existing studies indicate that the MDAS or DRS is useful in determining the severity of delirium; however, they are characterized by suboptimal accuracy for the detection of delirium. Although the reliability and validity of the Japanese version of these two scales have been confirmed (36,37), there are several barriers to their implementation in clinical practice. First, the use of these scales requires specific training of the medical staff. Second, it is difficult to use these scales for patients with severe physical disabilities, as they include several items that require the cooperation of patients. CCS and ADS have been developed for use in palliative care settings and were designed to overcome these shortcomings. However, larger studies are needed to validate the usefulness of these scales.

# CQ4. What are the common precipitating factors of delirium in patients with cancer?

# Recommendation

Poor general condition, dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities (e.g. abnormal sodium and hypermagnesemia), hypoalbuminemia, infection, hypoxic encephalopathy and other physical abnormalities, as well as drugs such as opioids, may cause delirium in cancer patients.

There were 29 studies on this CQ.

Moriita et al. conducted a prospective observational study to examine the risk factors for delirium in 150 terminal cancer patients in the hospice (38). In multivariate analysis, poor Palliative Performance Status,  $\geq 10$  physical symptoms and opioids were significantly associated with the incidence of delirium. Lawlor et al. conducted a retrospective study to examine the precipitating factors in 114 cancer patients admitted to a PCU (3). They found that delirium precipitated by psychoactive medications, including opioids, was significantly associated with reversibility, whereas hypoxic encephalopathy and non- respiratory infection were significantly associated with non- reversibility. Fann et al. conducted a prospective observational study to investigate the onset and severity of delirium from 1 week before to 30 days after transplantation in 90 patients with hematologic cancers undergoing haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (39). Pre- transplant higher blood urea nitrogen levels and cognitive decline were significantly associated with the development of delirium. Higher creatinine levels, history of systemic radiation therapy, higher magnesium levels, cognitive dysfunction, type of haematopoietic tumour, female sex, higher alkaline phosphatase levels, older age and prior alcohol or drug abuse were significantly associated with the severity of delirium. Ljubisavljevic et al. conducted a prospective observational study to examine baseline factors associated with the development of delirium in 113 cancer patients (40). Multivariate analysis showed that older age, cognitive impairment, low albumin levels, bone metastases and the presence of haematological malignancy were significantly associated with the development of delirium. In a prospective observational study, Yoshimura et al. investigated the risk factors for postoperative delirium in 100 liver cancer patients undergoing hepatectomy (41). Multivariate analysis showed that older age and decreased preoperative serum albumin concentration were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Gaudreau et al. conducted a prospective observational study to examine the association between exposure to anticholinergics, benzodiazepines, corticosteroids and opioids and the risk for delirium in 261 patients with cancer (42). Opioids, corticosteroids and benzodiazepines were independently associated with an increased risk of delirium. Gaudreau et al. also conducted a prospective observational study to determine whether exposure to corticosteroids, benzodiazepines or opioids predicted delirium in 114 cancer patients (43). Opioids were significantly associated with an increased risk for delirium. McAlpine et al. conducted a prospective observational study of the risk factors for postoperative delirium in 103 patients aged  $\geq 60$  years who underwent surgery for suspected gynaecologic cancer (44). Multivariate analysis showed that older age, multiple medications and additional narcotic doses above the standard patient- controlled analgesia were significantly associated with the development of postoperative delirium. Sagawa et al. conducted a prospective observational study to examine the causes of delirium in patients with cancer (45). Opioids, inflammation, dehydration and/or sodium- level abnormalities were frequent causes of delirium. Patti et al. conducted a cross- sectional observational study to examine the frequency and risk factors for delirium in 100 postoperative colorectal cancer patients aged  $\geq 65$  years (46). Multivariate analysis showed that lower preoperative albumin levels, alcohol abuse and hypotension were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Weckmann et al. conducted a prospective observational study to investigate delirium in 51 patients undergoing haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (47). Low oxygen saturation before transplantation, higher creatinine, higher blood urea nitrogen levels and lower oxygen saturation after transplantation were significantly associated with the development of delirium. Markar et al. conducted a prospective observational study of the risk factors for delirium in 500 patients with postoperative oesophageal cancer (48). Multivariate analysis showed that older age was significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Matsushita et al. conducted a cross- sectional observational study to investigate predictors of delirium in 84 postoperative patients aged  $\geq 65$  years who were hospitalized in the digestive surgery ward of a university hospital (49). Multivariate analysis showed that anaemia on the first postoperative day was significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Uchida et al. conducted a cross- sectional observational study to examine factors associated with delirium in 73 patients aged  $\geq 65$  years who were hospitalized with unresectable advanced lung cancer or gastrointestinal cancer with an ECOG PS of 2 or higher (2). Multivariate analysis showed that steroid use at admission and male sex was significantly associated with persistent delirium. Plaschke et al. conducted a prospective observational study to investigate the association between cholinesterase and delirium in 100 patients with cancer admitted to a PCU (50). Multivariate analysis showed that antibiotics, beta- blockers and midazolam were significantly associated with the development of delirium. Grandahl et al. conducted a cross- sectional observational study of 81 patients undergoing inpatient treatment in a specialized oncology ward to examine the frequency of delirium, its predictive factors and associations with cognitive function tests for delirium assessment (51). Multivariate analysis showed that central nervous system metastases and poor performance on cognitive tests were significantly associated with the development of delirium. Ochiai et al. conducted a cross- sectional observational study to investigate the association between preoperative psychological status and postoperative delirium in 109 patients aged  $\geq 65$  years who were scheduled for surgery for gastric and colorectal cancer and admitted to a university hospital (52). Multivariate analysis showed that a higher preoperative helplessness/hopelessness score was significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Matsuo et al. conducted a prospective observational study to examine the predictors of delirium in 207 patients with advanced cancer who had received steroids for fatigue or anorexia (53). Multivariate analysis showed that poor PS, drowsiness and opioid use were significantly associated with delirium development. Tanaka et al. conducted a prospective observational study to determine whether there was a difference in the incidence of delirium between different types of opioids in 114 patients receiving continuous intravenous opioids for the first time at a cancer hospital (54). The incidence of delirium was  $28.9\%$ $19.5\%$  and  $8.6\%$  in the morphine, oxycodone and fentanyl groups, respectively, and the morphine group patients were significantly more likely to develop delirium than the fentanyl group. Xiang et al. conducted a prospective observational study to investigate the association between C- reactive protein levels and postoperative delirium in 160 colorectal cancer patients aged  $\geq 65$  years scheduled for laparoscopic surgery

(55). Multivariate analysis showed that the preoperative CRP concentration was significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Senel et al. conducted a cross-sectional observational study of predictors of delirium in 213 cancer patients admitted to a PCU and reported that the use of opioids, benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, steroids, polypharmacy, several organ failures, brain cancer/metastases, infection, immobilization, malnutrition, sleep disturbance and constipation may be associated with delirium 
(56). Multivariate analysis was not performed. van der Sluis et al. conducted a cross-sectional observational study to investigate the risk factors for postoperative delirium in 436 postoperative colorectal cancer patients at a university hospital 
(57). Multivariate analysis showed that a history of psychiatric disease, older age and perioperative blood transfusion were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Zhu et al. conducted an SR of risk factors for postoperative delirium in patients after standard head and neck cancer surgery 
(58). Eight articles were analysed, including three prospective and five retrospective observational studies. Older age, age  $\geq 70$  years, male sex, duration of surgery, history of hypertension, intraoperative blood transfusion, tracheostomy, poor preoperative general condition, flap reconstruction and neck dissection were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Mercadante et al. conducted a prospective observational study of 848 cancer patients receiving palliative care to determine the frequency and predictors of delirium at admission and 1 week later 
(59). Multivariate analysis showed that older age, poor general condition, dehydration, cachexia, prior chemotherapy within 3 months, sleepiness and dyspnoea were significantly associated with delirium. Age, worsening drowsiness, use of opioids and use of corticosteroids were significantly associated with worse delirium. Miao et al. conducted a prospective observational study to examine the predictors of postoperative delirium in 112 elderly patients who underwent gastrointestinal cancer surgery 
(60). Multivariate analysis showed that neopterin levels and MMSE scores were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Flanigan et al. conducted a retrospective observational study to investigate the predictors of postoperative delirium in 554 patients diagnosed with glioblastoma 
(61). Multivariate analysis showed that age, chronic pulmonary disease, psychiatric history, bi-hemispheric tumour and tumour size were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Sanchez-Hurtado et al. conducted a cross-sectional observational study of delirium frequency and risk factors in 109 critically ill patients with cancer in ICUs 
(62). Multivariate analysis showed that the duration of mechanical ventilation was significantly associated with the onset of delirium. Wada et al. conducted a cross-sectional observational study to examine the association between preoperative anxiety and postoperative delirium in 118 cancer patients who underwent tumour resection at a cancer centre 
(63). Multivariate analysis showed that preoperative anxiety and older age were significantly associated with postoperative delirium. Mueller et al. conducted a subgroup analysis of an RCT to examine the association between preoperative anticholinergic drug load and postoperative delirium in 651 postoperative gastrointestinal, genitourinary and gynaecological cancer patients aged  $\geq 65$  
(64). Multivariate analysis showed that a higher anticholinergic drug scale score was significantly associated with the development of postoperative delirium. Older age, poor preoperative physical condition and longer ICU stay were also significantly associated with postoperative delirium.

These 29 studies were heterogeneous in terms of the study design, patients and outcomes. However, nine of those studies reported an association between opioids and delirium. Therefore, opioids are one of the most important causes of delirium in cancer patients. Although the results have been inconsistent, other causes (e.g. poor performance status, dehydration, electrolytic imbalance, infection, hypoxemic encephalopathy, benzodiazepines and corticosteroids) have also been reported to be associated with delirium.

# CQ5. Are antipsychotics alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer? Recommendation

Antipsychotics alone is suggested to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer (2C).

There were 13 studies on this CQ.

Breitbart et al. conducted an observational study of olanzapine for delirium in 79 cancer patients (65). Olanzapine significantly improved the severity of delirium based on the MDAS scores. No patients experienced extrapyramidal symptoms. Lin et al. conducted a prospective observational study to determine whether oral olanzapine or haloperidol improves delirium in 30 cancer patients with delirium who were admitted to a PCU or hospice and were referred to a psychiatric liaison team (66). The olanzapine group showed significant improvement in the DRS score on day 7 and the Clinical Global Impression- Severity (CGI- S) score  $24\mathrm{h}$  after the start of treatment. The haloperidol group showed significant improvement in DRS scores at 24 and  $48\mathrm{h}$  and 7 days after dosing and significant improvement in the CGI- S score at  $24\mathrm{h}$  after dosing. No adverse events were observed. Elsayem et al. conducted a prospective study to determine the safety and tolerability of subcutaneous olanzapine for hyperactive or mixed delirium in 24 cancer patients (67). An RASS score of  $\leq 1$  was achieved in  $38\%$  of the patients. Probable systemic adverse events were observed in four patients. Of all the patients,  $30\%$  experienced sedation. Watanabe et al. conducted a retrospective observational study to determine whether oral quetiapine improves delirium in 21 cancer patients with delirium (68). All patients improved their DRS- R98 scores by  $\geq 50\%$ ; however, the timing of the outcome assessment was not mentioned. Mild somnolence and dizziness were observed in one patient each. Kishi et al. conducted a prospective study to evaluate the effectiveness of risperidone against delirium in 29 cancer patients (69). The DRS- R98 severity scale score significantly improved from baseline to day 7, and  $38\%$  of patients achieved remission. No patients experienced extrapyramidal symptoms, but one patient experienced mild sedation. Tanimukai et al. conducted a prospective observational study of 27 cancer patients with delirium treated with antipsychotics and investigated whether delirium improved in the long half- time group (haloperidol, risperidone and olanzapine) or short half- time group (quetiapine) and whether delirium improved in the multi- acting receptor- targeted antipsychotics (MARTA) group (olanzapine and quetiapine) or non- MARTA group (haloperidol and risperidone) (70). The long half- time group showed a significant improvement in MDAS scores on day 3, and the short half- time group showed a significant improvement in MDAS scores on days 3 and 7 after the start of treatment, compared with the pre- treatment scores. The MARTA group showed a significant improvement in MDAS scores on days 3 and 7, while the non- MARTA group showed a significant improvement in MDAS scores on day 3 compared with the pre- treatment scores. No adverse events were observed. Matsuda et al. conducted a prospective observational study to determine whether oral risperidone improves delirium in 15 advanced cancer patients with delirium (71). Ten patients achieved DRS- 98 remission on the

7th day after treatment initiation (  $15 \geq$  DRS- 98). No adverse events were observed. Agar et al. conducted an RCT to determine the efficacy of risperidone or haloperidol relative to placebo in relieving the target symptoms of delirium associated with distress (sum of Nu- DESC behavioural, communication and perceptual items) in 247 patients receiving palliative care (cancer patients:  $88\%$ ) (72). Delirium symptom scores in the antipsychotic groups were significantly higher than those in the placebo group. Additionally, significantly more extrapyramidal effects were observed in the antipsychotic groups. The haloperidol group had significantly shorter survival time than the placebo group. Hui et al. conducted a double- blind RCT at an acute PCU to compare the efficacy of lorazepam versus placebo as an adjuvant to haloperidol for the management of persistent agitation in terminally ill advanced cancer patients with delirium (43). The addition of lorazepam to haloperidol resulted in a significantly greater reduction in agitation (RASS) at  $8 \mathrm{~h}$  than haloperidol alone. Moreover, the addition of lorazepam to haloperidol resulted in greater sedation than haloperidol alone. Takeuchi et al. conducted a retrospective observational study to investigate whether a quetiapine suppository improves delirium in 108 cancer patients with delirium who were unable to take the drug while hospitalized in a palliative care ward (73). Of the 80 patients included in the analysis, 34 responded to quetiapine suppositories alone and 46 responded to quetiapine suppositories in combination with other drugs after starting quetiapine suppositories. Both groups showed a significant reduction in the Agitation Distress Scale (ADS) values. Okuyama et al. conducted a prospective observational study to determine whether antipsychotics or trazodone administration improves hypoactive delirium in 218 advanced cancer patients with hypoactive delirium receiving palliative care (74). The results showed no significant change in the DRS- R- 98 scores after 3 days in all patients. The same was true for 208 patients who received antipsychotic medication. Of all patients, 19 were sedated, 3 had falls and 2 had aspiration pneumonia. No deaths were related to antipsychotics or trazodone. Hui et al. conducted an RCT to determine which pharmacological interventions for delirium, intravenous haloperidol dose escalation, rotation with chlorpromazine or haloperidol plus chlorpromazine improved delirium in 68 patients with agitated, haloperidol- resistant and refractory delirium who were hospitalized in a palliative care hospital (75). Within  $30 \mathrm{~min}$ , the RASS score decreased significantly in all groups and remained so for  $24 \mathrm{~h}$ ; however, no differences were not observed in the change in the RASS score between groups. Van der Vorst et al. conducted an RCT to determine whether oral or subcutaneous haloperidol or oral or intramuscular olanzapine improves delirium in 98 patients with advanced cancer and delirium (76). Both groups showed significant improvement; however, there was no significant difference between the two groups. In the group receiving olanzapine and haloperidol, somnolence, hand tremors and muscle stiffness were observed in  $18.3\%$ ,  $4\%$  and  $2\%$  and  $20.4\%$ ,  $6.1\%$  and  $4\%$ , respectively.

In one RCT, antipsychotic treatment was associated with worsening delirium, increased extrapyramidal symptoms and increased mortality (72). All but one of the other studies have suggested the efficacy and safety of antipsychotics. The RCT conducted by Agar et al. included mild to moderate delirium in patients admitted to a PCU, including many elderly patients, and included non- cancer patients; therefore, generalization to all cancer patients is difficult. Although the increase in extrapyramidal symptoms was statistically significant, the difference in the rating scale was not large, and no severe symptoms were observed. This increase in mortality may be due to factors other than haloperidol. An observational study that showed a lack of effectiveness of antipsychotics was conducted in patients with hypoactive delirium, which also limited the generalizability of the findings (74). Thus, we suggested that antipsychotics are to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer. However, the administration of antipsychotics to terminally ill cancer patients with delirium (see CQ11. Which interventions are recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in terminally ill patients with cancer?) and to cancer patients with hypoactive delirium should be carefully considered.

# CQ6. Is trazodone alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?

# Recommendation

Trazodone alone is suggested to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer (2D).

There was one study on this clinical question.

Maeda et al. conducted a secondary analysis of a multicentre prospective observational study to determine whether trazodone significantly improved delirium in 38 patients with cancer receiving palliative care (77). The total DRS- R- 98 score significantly improved after 3 days of trazodone administration.

Only one observational study has reported the efficacy of trazodone for delirium in patients with cancer. In Japan, trazodone has been used for the treatment of delirium, particularly hypoactive delirium. For example, Okumura et al. surveyed 136 experts in general hospital psychiatry in Japan to seek recommendations for first- line treatment of delirium (78). The results showed that  $>30\%$  of the experts recommended trazodone as a first- line oral drug for hypoactive delirium, regardless of patient age, renal function or the presence of diabetes mellitus. Thus, we suggested that trazodone is to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer.

# CQ7. Is hydroxyzine alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?

# Recommendation

Hydroxyzine alone is suggested not to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer (2D).

We could not identify any related studies for this CQ in the previous version or this update. Thus, we suggested that hydroxyzine alone is not to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer.

# CQ8. Is benzodiazepine alone recommended to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?

# Recommendation

Benzodiazepines alone are suggested not to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer (2C).

We did not identify any eligible studies for this CQ in cancer patients, but there were three SRs in non- cancer patients.

Wu et al. conducted an SR and network meta- analysis to examine whether pharmacotherapy is effective in preventing the onset of

delirium or reducing the symptoms of delirium in adult patients (7). The SR included 20 RCTs on treatment. The results of the network meta- analysis showed no superiority of lorazepam over placebo in terms of treatment response rate for delirium. Finucane et al. conducted an SR on the efficacy and safety of pharmacotherapy to reduce symptoms of delirium in terminally ill patients (79). The SR included four RCTs, and only one RCT conducted by Breitbart et al. used benzodiazepines alone and did not compare them with placebo/no treatment. The primary purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of haloperidol, chlorpromazine and lorazepam in the treatment of delirium in hospitalized AIDS patients with delirium (80). All six patients in the lorazepam group experienced adverse events, including worsening delirium and hyper sedation and the lorazepam group was discontinued. Li et al. conducted an SR on the efficacy and safety of benzodiazepines in patients with delirium receiving treatment outside the ICU (81). Two RCTs were included, one of which was the study conducted by Breitbart et al. (80), while the other study did not include patient groups in which benzodiazepines were administered alone.

There is no evidence that the use of benzodiazepines alone is effective in reducing the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer. Furthermore, a previous study reported an association between benzodiazepines and delirium (42). Thus, we suggest that benzodiazepines alone are not to be used to improve the symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer.

# CQ9. Is opioid switching recommended in cancer patients with delirium caused by opioids to improve the symptom of delirium?

# Recommendation

Opioid switching is suggested to be performed to improve the symptoms of delirium caused by opioids in patients with cancer (2C).

We identified seven studies for this CQ in the previous version (82- 88) and found no additional studies in this update. Thus, the recommendation in the previous version remains unchanged (see the previous version for detailed information).

# CQ10. Which non-pharmacological interventions are recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?

# Recommendation

Although there is a lack of evidence to recommend specific nonpharmacologic therapies for cancer patients with delirium to reduce symptoms of delirium, it may be effective to provide a comprehensive approach that includes efforts to maintain orientation, early bed release, audio- visual stimulation and environmental modification, physical activity (physical therapy), sleep- wake rhythm regulation and family education.

There were one study in cancer patients and six SRs in non- cancer patients on this CQ.

Tatematsu et al. conducted a retrospective study of 48 patients with cancer who were referred to a palliative care team (89). The patients were divided into two groups (exercise therapy or non- exercise therapy) according to the use of exercise therapy for early ambulation at the time delirium occurred. The dose of antipsychotics was significantly lower in the exercise therapy than the non- exercise therapy group. Britton et al. conducted an SR and meta- analysis of patients with chronic cognitive impairment and delirium after hospitalization to determine whether treatment of delirium by a multidisciplinary team would reduce its duration (90). Treatment of delirium by a multidisciplinary team included a medical assessment, medication verification, interventions by nursing staff, maintaining orientation, environmental control, training in activities of daily living and family care. Valid data were not available because only one study met the eligibility criteria for chronic cognitive impairment in some subjects. Milisen et al. conducted an SR on the effectiveness of multicomponent interventions for preventing and/or treating delirium in hospitalized patients aged  $\geq 60$  years (91). Among the seven studies included, interventions in three were classified as treatment strategies. Two of the three studies were conducted by Cole as described above. The former study reported improvement in cognitive function (92), but the latter found no significant effectiveness (93). The remaining study was a pre- and post- comparison study by Milisen et al. The intervention consisted of screening by nurses, assessment of the causes of delirium and consultation if detected (94). They found that their intervention effectively reduced the duration and severity of delirium. Abraha et al. conducted an SR and meta- analysis to determine whether non- pharmacologic therapies are effective in treating or preventing delirium in elderly patients (95). Four RCTs of treatment were included in this study. Interventions varied across studies, with individualized care planning as a common element but included measures of disorientation, promotion of early bed release, family education and environmental stimulus control. Meta- analyses were not conducted because of the differences across studies in the assessment of outcome measures. Bannon et al. conducted an SR and meta- analysis to determine whether non- pharmacologic therapy is effective in preventing or treating delirium in patients with critical illness (96). A meta- analysis using pooled data from two trials that included physiotherapy as an intervention arm indicated no significant effect on delirium (97,98). Haley et al. conducted an SR to examine whether physical training (physical therapy) is effective in preventing or treating delirium (99). Among the seven studies included, only one study conducted by Pitkala et al. investigated the efficacy of interventions to reduce symptoms of delirium. They found that a multicomponent intervention that included physiotherapy showed significant improvement in the symptoms of delirium (100). Hosie et al. conducted an SR to describe non- pharmacological interventions for the prevention and treatment of delirium in hospitalized patients requiring palliative care (101). Twenty- nine studies were included, and three studies pertained to treatment. Two studies by Cole et al. were RCTs with combined interventions, and the study by Chong et al. combined interventions in a before- and- after controlled trial (92,93,102). The common threads of therapeutic interventions were cognitive activity, physical activity, auditory/visual modulation, sleep- wake rhythm regulation and environmental modification.

Regarding non- pharmacological interventions, only one observational clinical study has been conducted in patients with cancer. However, the study did not include an assessment of delirium severity. In non- cancer patients, we found six SRs, but the effectiveness of the interventions reported in studies included in these SRs was inconsistent, and the number of included studies was small. However, the disadvantages of non- pharmacologic therapy are thought to be minimal. Therefore, we described the above- mentioned interventions in the recommendation.

# CQ11. Which interventions are recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in terminally ill patients with cancer?

# Recommendation

Antipsychotics are not recommended as first- line management for mild- to- moderate delirium in terminally ill cancer patients. Antipsychotics may be indicated for severe hyperactive delirium in terminally ill cancer patients. When antipsychotics alone are not effective against severe hyperactive delirium in terminally ill cancer patients, the combination of a benzodiazepine and an antipsychotic may be a management option. Even at the end of life, the cause of delirium should be identified and eliminated. If dehydration is thought to be the cause, consider IV fluids; if opioids are thought to be the cause, opioid switching should be considered.

There were 11 studies on this CQ.

Pharmacological interventions. Elsayem et al. conducted a prospective study to determine the safety and tolerability of subcutaneous olanzapine in the management of hyperactive or mixed delirium in advanced cancer patients (see CQ5. Are antipsychotics alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?) (67). Agar et al. conducted an RCT to determine the efficacy of risperidone or haloperidol versus placebo in the treatment of delirium in patients receiving palliative care (see CQ5. Are antipsychotics alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?) (72). Hui et al. conducted a double- blind RCT at an acute PCU to compare the efficacy of lorazepam versus placebo as an adjuvant to haloperidol for the management of persistent agitation in terminally ill patients with advanced cancer with delirium (see CQ5. Are antipsychotics alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?) (103). Takeuchi et al. conducted a retrospective observational study to investigate whether a quetiapine suppository improves delirium in 108 cancer patients with delirium who were unable to take the drug while hospitalized in a palliative care ward (see CQ5. Are antipsychotics alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?) (73). Hui et al. conducted an RCT to determine which pharmacological interventions for delirium, intravenous haloperidol dose escalation, rotation with chlorpromazine or haloperidol plus chlorpromazine improved delirium in patients with agitated, haloperidol- resistant and refractory delirium who were hospitalized in a palliative care hospital (see CQ5. Are antipsychotics alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?) (75).

Hydration. We identified two RCTs, all of which were included in previous guidelines (104,105).

Opioid switching. We identified three observational studies (see CQ6. Is trazodone alone recommended to improve symptoms of delirium in patients with cancer?) (82,84,88).

Celiac plexus block. We identified one observational study that was included in the previous guidelines (106).

Regarding pharmacological interventions, the study conducted by Agar et al. did not show the superiority of antipsychotics over placebo (72). However, this study has some limitations. It was conducted in patients with mild to moderate delirium, and the outcome assessment was not based on methods with established reliability and validity. The lack of a comparison with the placebo group in the Hui et al. RCT makes it difficult to consider whether the observed reduction in RASS scores in each group was due to pharmacologic effects, the variability of delirium or non- pharmacologic factors (75). We did not include the studies conducted by Takeuchi et al. and Elsayem et al. as recommendations because the study conducted by Takeuchi et al. was a retrospective medical record study and the study conducted by Elsayem et al. did not include a statistical analysis of the effect of delirium treatment (67,73). Based on the results of the study conducted by Agar et al., we decided not to recommend the use of antipsychotics for delirium in terminally ill patients with cancer. On the other hand, we added that antipsychotics may be indicated for severe hyperactive delirium in terminally ill patients with cancer because patients with severe or refractory delirium were not adequately studied in the study conducted by Agar et al. Hui et al. showed that refractory delirium can be treated with increased doses of haloperidol, a change to chlorpromazine or a combination of haloperidol and chlorpromazine; furthermore, when symptoms are severe in active delirium, it is difficult to provide medical treatment and care and ensure patient safety (72,75). Based on the results of a study conducted by Hui et al., when antipsychotics alone are not effective against severe hyperactive delirium in terminally ill cancer patients, the combination of benzodiazepine and an antipsychotic may be a management option (103).

# CQ12. What is the support that is preferred by the family of cancer patients with delirium?

The support that is preferred by the family of cancer patients with delirium includes specific support for delirium, information support and non- specific general support.

There was one study, and there were no new reports on this CQ since the previous guidelines (107).

# Discussion

This was the first revision since the first 2019 edition. We added three new CQs regarding non- pharmacological intervention for the prevention of delirium (CQ1), antipsychotics for the prevention of delirium (CQ2) and trazodone for the management of delirium (CQ6). In addition, these revised guidelines included studies on postoperative delirium that were not included in the first guidelines.

We designated CQ1 as the background question because of the diversity of the non- pharmacological interventions. We identified more RCTs of multicomponent non- pharmacological interventions than expected. Thus, we would consider changing CQ1 from the background question to the usual CQ in the future. In CQ2, the intervention was limited to antipsychotics. Other drugs, including melatonin receptor agonists and orexin receptor antagonists, have been reported to prevent delirium. Thus, we would consider adding new CQs to the preventive effect of these drugs on delirium. In CQ6, although we stated that trazodone alone is suggested to be used, the certainty of the evidence was D (very weak). In contrast, that of antipsychotics was C (weak). This would indicate that antipsychotics may be the first- line pharmacological intervention for delirium and further studies on trazodone are warranted. In addition, the effectiveness of trazodone for each delirium subtype should be studied.

The recommendations in four CQs (CQ5, 7, 8, and 9), except for background questions included in the first guidelines were not changed in the revised guidelines, and the strength of the recommendation in these four CQs was weak. Although some

new studies were included, more RCTs are needed to state strong recommendations.

We believe that these revised guidelines will contribute to the dissemination of evidence- based care for the prevention, assessment and management of delirium in adult cancer patients in Japan. High- quality clinical studies are required to develop evidence- based delirium care for patients with cancer.

# Acknowledgments

AcknowledgmentsThe development of these guidelines was greatly assisted by the following individuals: Fumio Nagashima, Mayumi Noda and Sen Yamakawa (external reviewers); Etsuko Ariga (Japan Society of Clinical Oncology), Naoki Uchida (Japanese Association for Home Care Medicine), Matsue Saito (Japanese Cancer Association), Jiichiro Sasaki (Japanese Society of Medical Oncology), Junya Sato (Japanese Society for Pharmaceutical Palliative), Nobuhisa Nakajima (Japanese Society for Palliative Medicine), Kotaro Hatta (Japanese Society of General Hospital Psychiatry), Ruriko Hayashi (Japanese Society of Cancer Nursing), Yoko Matsumoto (Japan Federation of Patient Groups) and Toru Mukouhara (Japanese Association of Supportive Care in Cancer) (Delphi members); and Yumi Watanabe and Yurika Sato (literature researcher).

# Funding

FundingThis work was funded by the Japan Psycho- Oncology Society.

# Conflict of interest statement

Conflict of interest statementDr Matsuda received lectures fee from Takeda Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd. Dr Tanimukai received a scholarship donation from Eisai Co, Ltd and research grants from Pfizer Japan Inc. Dr Yoshimura received honoraria from Eisai Co, Ltd, FUJIFILM Toyama Chemical Co, Ltd, Nikkiso Co, Ltd, Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd and Sumitomo Pharma Co, Ltd. Dr Wada received lecture fees from Eisai Co, Ltd and Sumitomo Pharma Co, Ltd. Dr Takeuchi received grants from Kyowa Kirin Co, Ltd, Daiichi Sankyo Co, Ltd, Shionogi Co, Ltd and Maruishi Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd and honoraria from Kyowa Kirin Co, Ltd, Daiichi Sankyo Co, Ltd and Shionogi Co, Ltd. Dr Sadahiro received grants from the SGH Foundation and honoraria from Meiji, Takeda and Merck & Co. Dr Kishi received honoraria from Shionogi & Co, Ltd, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Otsuka, Pfizer, Mochida, Eli Lilly, Daiichi- Sankyo Co, Ltd, Eisai Co, Ltd, DainihonSumitomo, Tanabe- Mitsubishi and Tsumura and served as a consultant for Meiji and Merck Sharp & Dohme. Dr Ogawa received lectures fee from Eisai Co, Ltd and Chugai Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd. Dr Inagaki received lecture fees from EA Pharma, Meiji, MSD, Viatris, Eisai, Otsuka, Sumitomo Pharma, Takeda, Eli Lilly, Nippon Shinyaku, Pfizer, Mochida, Yoshitomiyakuhin and Janssen. His institute received research funds from Astellas, Eisai, Otsuka, Shionogi, Daiichi Sankyo, Sumitomo Pharma, Takeda, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Nihon Medi- Physics, Pfizer, Fujifilm and Mochida, Dr Okuyama received grants from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan, and the Japanese Society for the Promotion of Science and honoraria from Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma Co, Ltd, Pfizer Japan Inc, MSD K.K., Eisai Co, Ltd and Daiichi Sankyo Co, Ltd.

# References

1. Association AP. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edn: DSM-5. 5 edn. Arlington: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013. 
2. Uchida M, Okuyama T, Ito Y, et al. Prevalence, course and factors associated with delirium in elderly patients with advanced cancer: a longitudinal observational study. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2015;45: 934-40.

References1. Association AP. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edn: DSM- 5. 5 edn. Arlington: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013. 2. Uchida M, Okuyama T, Ito Y, et al. Prevalence, course and factors associated with delirium in elderly patients with advanced cancer: a longitudinal observational study. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2015;45: 934- 40. 3. Lawlor PG, Gagnon B, Mancini IL, et al. Occurrence, causes, and outcome of delirium in patients with advanced cancer: a prospective study. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:786- 94. 4. Breitbart W, Gibson C, Tremblay A. The delirium experience: delirium recall and delirium- related distress in hospitalized patients with cancer, their spouses/caregivers, and their nurses. Psychosomatics 2002;43:183- 94. 5. Bruera E, Bush SH, Willey J, et al. Impact of delirium and recall on the level of distress in patients with advanced cancer and their family caregivers. Cancer 2009;115:2004- 12. 6. Matsuda Y, Tanimukai H, Inoue S, et al. JPOS/JASCC clinical guidelines for delirium in adult cancer patients: a summary of recommendation statements. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2020;50:586- 93. 7. Wu YC, Tseng PT, Tu YK, et al. Association of Delirium Response and Safety of pharmacological interventions for the management and prevention of delirium: a network meta- analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 2019;76:526- 35. 8. Matsuda Y, Morita T, Oya K, et al. Drug choice for hyperactive delirium in terminally- ill cancer patients: a Nationwide survey. J Pain Symptom Manag 2022;64:e231- e4. 9. Noriko Kojimahara TN, Morizane T, Yamaguchi N, Yoshida M, editor. Minds Manual for Guideline Development 2017. Tokyo: Japan Council for Quality Health Care, 2017. editors. 10. Masahiro Nakagawa TI, Fukushima C, Tachi K, et al. Relationship between postoperative delirium and bed rest after microsurgical reconstruction of head and neck cancer. Japanese journal of head and neck. Cancer 2005;31:576- 80. 11. Taguchi T, Yano M, Kido Y. Influence of bright light therapy on postoperative patients: a pilot study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2007;23: 289- 97. 12. Gagnon P, Allard P, Gagnon B, Merette C, Tardif F. Delirium prevention in terminal cancer: assessment of a multicomponent intervention. Psychooncology 2012;21:187- 94. 13. Hempenius L, Slaets JP, van Asselt D, de Bock GH, Wiggers T, van Leeuwen BL. Outcomes of a geriatric liaison intervention to prevent the development of postoperative delirium in frail elderly cancer patients: report on a multicentre, randomized, controlled trial. PloS One 2013;8:e64834. 14. Hempenius L, Slaets JP, van Asselt D, de Bock TH, Wiggers T, van Leeuwen BL. Long term outcomes of a geriatric liaison intervention in frail elderly cancer patients. PloS One 2016;11: e0143364. 15. Guo Y, Sun L, Li L, et al. Impact of multicomponent, nonpharmacologic interventions on perioperative cortisol and melatonin levels and postoperative delirium in elderly oral cancer patients. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2016;62:112- 7. 16. Chen CC, Li HC, Liang JT, et al. Effect of a modified hospital elder life program on delirium and length of hospital stay in patients undergoing abdominal surgery: a cluster randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg 2017;152:827- 34. 17. Ogawa A, Okumura Y, Fujisawa D, et al. Quality of care in hospitalized cancer patients before and after implementation of a systematic prevention program for delirium: the DELTA exploratory trial. Support Care Cancer 2019;27:557- 65. 18. Wang YY, Yue JR, Xie DM, et al. Effect of the tailored, family- involved hospital elder life program on postoperative delirium and function in older adults: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2020;180:17- 25. 19. Hosie A, Phillips J, Lam L, et al. A multicomponent nonpharmacological intervention to prevent delirium for hospitalized people with advanced cancer: a phase II cluster randomized waitlist controlled trial (the PRESERVE pilot study). J Palliat Med 2020;23:1314- 22. 20. Ichiro Arii IY, Hamamoto Y, Shinjo T, Yagi Y, Kunisawa M, Fukui K. Delirium in end term cancer patients: experience in a palliative care unit. Japanese journal of. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2004;16:271- 7. 21. Khan BA, Perkins AJ, Campbell NL, et al. Preventing postoperative delirium after major noncardiac thoracic surgery- a randomized clinical trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2018;66:2289- 97.

22. Hiroki Sakurai TH, Goto A, Yamaguchi I, Ishida Y. Development of a tool to screen for delirium, depression, and dementia simultaneously. GanKango 2014;19:434-9.  
23. de la Cruz M, Noguera A, San Miguel-Arregui MT, Williams J, Chisholm G, Bruera E. Delirium, agitation, and symptom distress within the final seven days of life among cancer patients receiving hospice care. Palliat Support Care 2015;13:211-6.  
24. Neefjes ECW, van der Vorst M, Boddaert MSA, et al. Accuracy of the delirium observational screening scale (DOS) as a screening tool for delirium in patients with advanced cancer. BMC Cancer 2019; 19:160.  
25. Breitbart W, Rosenfeld B, Roth A, Smith MJ, Cohen K, Passik S. The memorial delirium assessment scale. J Pain Symptom Manag 1997;13:128-37.  
26. Lawlor PG, Nekolaichuk C, Gagnon B, Mancini IL, Pereira JL, Bruera ED. Clinical utility, factor analysis, and further validation of the memorial delirium assessment scale in patients with advanced cancer: assessing delirium in advanced cancer. Cancer 2000;88:2859-67.  
27. Grassi L, Caraceni A, Beltrami E, et al. Assessing delirium in cancer patients: the Italian versions of the delirium rating scale and the memorial delirium assessment scale. J Pain Symptom Manag 2001;21: 59-68.  
28. Bosisio M, Caraceni A, Grassi L, Italian Delirium Study G. Phenomenology of delirium in cancer patients, as described by the memorial delirium assessment scale (MDAS) and the delirium rating scale (DRS). Psychosomatics 2006;47:471-8.  
29. Ryan K, Leonard M, Guerin S, Donnelly S, Conroy M, Meagher D. Validation of the confusion assessment method in the palliative care setting. Palliat Med 2009;23:40-5.  
30. Barahona E, Pinhao R, Galibash V, Noguera A. The diagnostic sensitivity of the memorial delirium assessment scale-Spanish version. J Pain Symptom Manag 2018;55:968-72.  
31. Kang B, Kim YJ, Suh SW, Son KL, Ahn GS, Park HY. Delirium and its consequences in the specialized palliative care unit: validation of the Korean version of memorial delirium assessment scale. Psychooncology 2019;28:160-6.  
32. Meagher D, Moran M, Raju B, et al. A new data-based motor subtype schema for delirium. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2008;20:185-93.  
33. Morita T, Tsunoda J, Inoue S, Chihara S, Oka K. Communication capacity scale and agitation distress scale to measure the severity of delirium in terminally ill cancer patients: a validation study. Palliat Med 2001;15:197-206.  
34. Noguera A, Carvajal A, Alonso-Babarro A, Chisholm G, Bruera E, Centeno C. First Spanish version of the memorial delirium assessment scale: psychometric properties, responsiveness, and factor loadings. J Pain Symptom Manag 2014;47:189-97.  
35. Leonard MM, Nekolaichuk C, Meagher DJ, et al. Practical assessment of delirium in palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manag 2014;48: 176-90.  
36. Matsuoka Y, Miyake Y, Arakaki H, Tanaka K, Saeki T, Yamawaki S. Clinical utility and validation of the Japanese version of memorial delirium assessment scale in a psychogeriatric inpatient setting. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2001;23:36-40.  
37. Kato M, Kishi Y, Okuyama T, Trzepacz PT, Hosaka T. Japanese version of the delirium rating scale, Revised-98 (DRS-R98-J): reliability and validity. Psychosomatics 2010;51:425-31.  
38. Tatsuya, Morita JT, Inoue S. The risk factors for delirium in terminal cancer patients: a prospective study. Clinical Psychiatry 1998;40:823-9.  
39. Fann JR, Roth-Roemer S, Burington BE, Katon WJ, Syrjala KL. Delirium in patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Cancer 2002;95:1971-81.  
40. Ljubisavljevic V, Kelly B. Risk factors for development of delirium among oncology patients. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2003;25:345-52.  
41. Yoshimura Y, Kubo S, Shirata K, et al. Risk factors for postoperative delirium after liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Surg 2004;28:982-6.

42. Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Harel F, Roy MA, Tremblay A. Psychoactive medications and risk of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:6712-8.  
43. Gaudreau JD, Gagnon P, Roy MA, Harel F, Tremblay A. Opioid medications and longitudinal risk of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients. Cancer 2007;109:2365-73.  
44. McAlpine JN, Hodgson EJ, Abramowitz S, et al. The incidence and risk factors associated with postoperative delirium in geriatric patients undergoing surgery for suspected gynecologic malignancies. Gynecol Oncol 2008;109:296-302.  
45. Sagawa R, Akechi T, Okuyama T, Uchida M, Furukawa TA. Etiologies of delirium and their relationship to reversibility and motor subtype in cancer patients. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2009;39:175-82.  
46. Patti R, Saitta M, Cusumano G, Termine G, Di Vita G. Risk factors for postoperative delirium after colorectal surgery for carcinoma. Eur J Oncol Nurs 2011;15:519-23.  
47. Weckmann MT, Gingrich R, Mills JA, Hook L, Beglinger LJ. Risk factors for delirium in patients undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Ann Clin Psychiatry 2012;24:204-14.  
48. Markar SR, Smith IA, Karthikesalingan A, Low DE. The clinical and economic costs of delirium after surgical resection for esophageal malignancy. Ann Surg 2013;258:77-81.  
49. Matsushita T. Predictive value and usefulness of the Japanese version of the NEECHAM confusion and delirium scale one-week postoperative follow-up study of elderly patients undergoing gastrointestinal surgery. Yokohama Kangogaku Zassi 2013;6:1-6.  
50. Plaschke K, Petersen KA, Frankenhauser S, Weigand MA, Kopitz J, Bardenheuer HJ. The impact of plasma cholinergic enzyme activity and other risk factors for the development of delirium in patients receiving palliative care. J Pain Symptom Manag 2016;52:525-32.  
51. Grandahl MG, Nielsen SE, Koerner EA, Schultz HH, Arnfred SM. Prevalence of delirium among patients at a cancer ward: clinical risk factors and prediction by bedside cognitive tests. Nord J Psychiatry 2016;70:413-7.  
52. Ochiai YKA, Nukariya K, et al. Psychological risk factor of postoperative delirium in patients with gastrointestinal cancer. Jikeikai Med J 2016;63:37-43.  
53. Matsuo N, Morita T, Matsuda Y, et al. Predictors of delirium in corticosteroid-treated patients with advanced cancer: an exploratory, Multicenter, prospective. Observational Study J Palliat Med 2017;20:352-9.  
54. Tanaka R, Ishikawa H, Sato T, et al. Incidence of delirium among patients having cancer injected with different opioids for the first time. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2017;34:572-6.  
55. Xiang D, Xing H, Tai H, Xie G. Preoperative C-reactive protein as a risk factor for postoperative delirium in elderly patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery for colon carcinoma. Biomed Res Int 2017;2017:5635640.  
56. Senel G, Uysal N, Oguz G, et al. Delirium frequency and risk factors among patients with cancer in palliative care unit. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2017;34:282-6.  
57. van der Sluis FJ, Buisman PL, Meerdink M, et al. Risk factors for postoperative delirium after colorectal operation. Surgery 2017;161:704-11.  
58. Zhu Y, Wang G, Liu S, et al. Risk factors for postoperative delirium in patients undergoing major head and neck cancer surgery: a meta-analysis. Jpn J Clin Oncol 2017;47:505-11.  
59. Mercadante S, Masedu F, Balzani I, et al. Prevalence of delirium in advanced cancer patients in home care and hospice and outcomes after 1 week of palliative care. Support Care Cancer 2018;26:913-9.  
60. Miao S, Shen P, Zhang Q, et al. Neopterin and mini-mental state examination scores, two independent risk factors for postoperative delirium in elderly patients with open abdominal surgery. J Cancer Res Ther 2018;14:1234-8.  
61. Flanigan PM, Jahangiri A, Weinstein D, et al. Postoperative delirium in glioblastoma patients: risk factors and prognostic implications. Neurosurgery 2018;83:1161-72.

62. Sanchez-Hurtado LA, Hernandez-Sanchez N, Del Moral-Armengol M, et al. Incidence of delirium in critically ill cancer patients. Pain Res Manag 2018;2018:4193275.  
63. Wada S, Inoguchi H, Sadahiro R, et al. Preoperative anxiety as a predictor of delirium in cancer patients: a prospective observational cohort study. World J Surg 2019;43:134-42.  
64. Mueller A, Spies CD, Eckardt R, et al. Anticholinergic burden of long-term medication is an independent risk factor for the development of postoperative delirium: a clinical trial. J Clin Anesth 2020;61:109632.  
65. Breitbart W, Tremblay A, Gibson C. An open trial of olanzapine for the treatment of delirium in hospitalized cancer patients. Psychosomatics 2002;43:175-82.  
66. Lin CJSF, Fang CK, et al. An open trial comparing haloperidol with olanzapine for the treatment of delirium in palliative and hospice center cancer patients. J Intern Med Taiwan 2008;19:345-54.  
67. Elsayem A, Bush SH, Munsell MF, et al. Subcutaneous olanzapine for hyperactive or mixed delirium in patients with advanced cancer: a preliminary study. J Pain Symptom Manag 2010;40:774-82.  
68. Akira Watanabe YN, Kuroda T, Fukui K. Efficacy of quetiapine for the treatment of patients with delirium in palliative medicine. Jpn J Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2011;23:277-86.  
69. Kishi Y, Kato M, Okuyama T, Thurber S. Treatment of delirium with risperidone in cancer patients. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2012;66:411-7.  
70. Tanimukai H, Tsujimoto H, Matsuda Y, et al. Novel therapeutic strategies for delirium in patients with cancer: a preliminary study. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2016;33:456-62.  
71. Matsuda Y, Nakao Y, Yabe M, Tsuruta R, Takemura M, Inoue K. Association of the Clinical Subtype and Etiology for delirium with the outcome after risperidone monotherapy in patients having cancer. Osaka City Med J 2016;62:19-28.  
72. Agar MR, Lawlor PG, Quinn S, et al. Efficacy of oral risperidone, haloperidol, or placebo for symptoms of delirium among patients in palliative care: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2017;177:34-42.  
73. Kana Takeuchi MK, Tamura A, Amasaki M, Ueda H. Experience in using in-hospital formulation quetiapine suppositories for delirium in cancer patients. Palliative care. Research 2017;12:717-22.  
74. Okuyama T, Yoshiuchi K, Ogawa A, et al. Current pharmacotherapy does not improve severity of hypoactive delirium in patients with advanced cancer: pharmacological audit study of safety and efficacy in real world (phase-R). Oncologist 2019;24:e574-e82.  
75. Hui D, De La Rosa A, Wilson A, et al. Neuroleptic strategies for terminal agitation in patients with cancer and delirium at an acute palliative care unit: a single-Centre, double-blind, parallel-group, randomised trial. Lancet Oncol 2020;21:989-98.  
76. van der Vorst M, Neefjes ECW, Boddaert MSA, et al. Olanzapine versus haloperidol for treatment of delirium in patients with advanced cancer: a phase III randomized clinical trial. Oncologist 2020;25:e570-e7.  
77. Maeda I, Inoue S, Uemura K, et al. Low-dose trazodone for delirium in patients with cancer who received specialist palliative care: a Multicenter prospective study. J Palliat Med 2021;24:914-8.  
78. Okumura Y, Hatta K, Wada K, Takeuchi T, Kishi Y, Group DJ. Expert opinions on the first-line pharmacological treatment for delirium in Japan: a conjoint analysis. Int Psychogeriatr 2016;28:1041-50.  
79. Finucane AM, Jones L, Leurent B, et al. Drug therapy for delirium in terminally ill adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;1:CD004770.  
80. Breitbart W, Marotta R, Platt MM, et al. A double-blind trial of haloperidol, chlorpromazine, and lorazepam in the treatment of delirium in hospitalized AIDS patients. Am J Psychiatry 1996;153:231-7.  
81. Li Y, Ma J, Jin Y, et al. Benzodiazepines for treatment of patients with delirium excluding those who are cared for in an intensive care unit. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2020;2:CD012670.  
82. Chizuko Takigawa YK, Ueda K, Morimoto Y. Efficacy of partial opioid rotation of morphine to intravenous compound oxycodone for morphine-induced delirium in advanced cancer patients. J Jpn Soc Pain Clin 2009;6:557-63.

83. Morita T, Takigawa C, Onishi H, et al. Opioid rotation from morphine to fentanyl in delirious cancer patients: an open-label trial. J Pain Symptom Manag 2005;30:96-103.  
84. Moryl N, Kogan M, Comfort C, Obbens E. Methadone in the treatment of pain and terminal delirium in advanced cancer patients. Palliat Support Care 2005;3:311-7.  
85. Benitez-Rosario MA, Feria M, Salinas-Martin A, Martinez-Castillo LP, Martin-Ortega JJ. Opioid switching from transdermal fentanyl to oral methadone in patients with cancer pain. Cancer 2004;101:2866-73.  
86. Gagnon B, Bielech M, Watanabe S, Walker P, Hanson J, Bruera E. The use of intermittent subcutaneous injections of oxycodone for opioid rotation in patients with cancer pain. Support Care Cancer 1999;7:265-70.  
87. Maddocks I, Somogyi A, Abbott F, Hayball P, Parker D. Attenuation of morphine-induced delirium in palliative care by substitution with infusion of oxycodone. J Pain Symptom Manag 1996;12:182-9.  
88. Morita T, Tei Y, Inoue S. Agitated terminal delirium and association with partial opioid substitution and hydration. J Palliat Med 2003;6:557-63.  
89. Tatematsu N, Hayashi A, Narita K, Tamaki A, Tsuboyama T. The effects of exercise therapy on delirium in cancer patients: a retrospective study. Support Care Cancer 2011;19:765-70.  
90. Britton A, Russell R. Multidisciplinary team interventions for delirium in patients with chronic cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;CD000395.  
91. Milisen K, Lemiengre J, Braes T, Foreman MD. Multicomponent intervention strategies for managing delirium in hospitalized older people: systematic review. J Adv Nurs 2005;52:79-90.  
92. Cole MG, Primeau FJ, Bailey RF, et al. Systematic intervention for elderly inpatients with delirium: a randomized trial. CMAJ 1994;151:965-70.  
93. Cole MG, McCusker J, Bellavance F, et al. Systematic detection and multidisciplinary care of delirium in older medical inpatients: a randomized trial. CMAJ 2002;167:753-9.  
94. Milisen K, Foreman MD, Abraham IL, et al. A nurse-led interdisciplinary intervention program for delirium in elderly hip-fracture patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 2001;49:523-32.  
95. Abraha I, Trotta F, Rimland JM, et al. Efficacy of non-pharmacological interventions to prevent and treat delirium in older patients: a systematic overview. The SENATOR project ONTOP series. PloS One 2015;10:e0123090.  
96. Bannon L, McGaughey J, Verghis R, Clarke M, McAuley DF, Blackwood B. The effectiveness of non-pharmacological interventions in reducing the incidence and duration of delirium in critically ill patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med 2019;45:1-12.  
97. Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, et al. Early physical and occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2009;371:1874-82.  
98. Morris PE, Berry MJ, Files DC, et al. Standardized rehabilitation and hospital length of stay among patients with acute respiratory failure: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016;315:2694-702.  
99. Haley MN, Casey P, Kane RY, Darzins P, Lawler K. Delirium management: Let's get physical? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Australas J Ageing 2019;38:231-41.  
100. Pitkala KH, Laurila JV, Strandberg TE, Tilvis RS. Multicomponent geriatric intervention for elderly inpatients with delirium: a randomized, controlled trial. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2006;61:176-81.  
101. Hosie A, Siddiqi N, Featherstone I, et al. Inclusion, characteristics and outcomes of people requiring palliative care in studies of non-pharmacological interventions for delirium: a systematic review. Palliat Med 2019;33:878-99.  
102. Chong MS, Chan M, Tay L, Ding YY. Outcomes of an innovative model of acute delirium care: the geriatric monitoring unit (GMU). Clin Interv Aging 2014;9:603-12.

103. Hui D, Frisbee-Hume S, Wilson A, et al. Effect of lorazepam with haloperidol vs haloperidol alone on agitated delirium in patients with advanced cancer receiving palliative care: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2017;318:1047-56.  
104. Bruera E, Hui D, Dalal S, et al. Parenteral hydration in patients with advanced cancer: a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 2013;31:111-8.

105. Cerchietti L, Navigante A, Sauri A, Palazzo F. Hypodermoclysis for control of dehydration in terminal-stage cancer. Int J Palliat Nurs 2000;6:370-4.  
106. Arai YC, Nishihara M, Kobayashi K, et al. Neurolytic celiac plexus block reduces occurrence and duration of terminal delirium in patients with pancreatic cancer. J Anesth 2013;27:88-92.  
107. Namba M, Morita T, Imura C, Kiyohara E, Ishikawa S, Hirai K. Terminal delirium: families' experience. Palliat Med 2007;21:587-94.