Review Article

# Expert consensus on research priorities for the prevention of delirium in adult ICU patients

Stef Beerens a,1, Laurens Van Steenkiste a,1, Ingrid Egerod b, Thomas Gargadenec c, Mu- Hsing Ho d, Peter Nydahl e, Jessica A. Palakshappa f, Brenda Pun g, Louise Rose h, Mark van den Boogaard i, Bart Van Rompaey j, Bradley Wibrow k, Sonia O. Labeau l, Stijn Blot m,

a Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium  b Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  c Department of Anesthesia and Surgical Intensive Care, University of Western Brittany, Brest, France  d Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, PR China  e Nursing Science and Development, University Hospital of Schleswig- Holstein, Kiel, Germany  f Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and Immunologic Diseases, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston- Salem, NC, United States  g Critical Illness, Brain Dysfunction, and Survivorship Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States  h Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery and Palliative Care, King's College London, London, United Kingdom  i Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands  j Department of Family Medicine and Population Health, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium  k Faculty Health and Medical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia  l School of Healthcare, Nurse education programme, Present address, HOGENT Learning Education Academy & Centre for Applied Data Science & Research Centre for Learning in Diversity, HOGENT University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Ghent, Belgium  m Department of Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

# ARTICLEINFO

Keywords: Delirium  Intensive Care Unit  Modified Delphi Procedure  Prevention  Research Agenda  Research Priorities

# ABSTRACT

Objective: To identify research priorities for the prevention of delirium in adult intensive care unit (ICU) patients. Research Methodology: We conducted an iterative, consensus- based modified Delphi methodology combined with initial literature search to establish a prioritized research agenda. As a first round of an anonymised modified Delphi procedure, a 10- member international expert panel, selected on basis of their academic and clinical expertise, were asked to add topics they perceived missing from a list of potential research gaps regarding ICU delirium prevention. In the second round, experts rated each topic research priority using a 4- point Likert scale (very low to very high). Topics were considered a research priority if rated 'high' or 'very high' by at least  $80\%$  of experts. A third round to establish a top 3 was planned if more than 10 priorities were identified.

Main Outcome measures: Research priorities for delirium prevention in adult ICU patients.

Results: The evidence- based list comprised 44 potential research priorities with experts suggesting 9 additional topics. Of the 53 potential research priorities, 8 were unanimously rated as research priorities: 'early mobilization', 'exercise interventions', 'sedation breaks for ventilator weaning', 'routine delirium surveillance', 'cognitive training/exercise', 'reducing light, noise, and care activities at night', 'open visiting hours', and 'family participation'.

Conclusions: We have identified 8 research priorities for delirium prevention in adult ICU patients.

Implications for Clinical Practice: The research agenda developed in this study provides direction for future investigations into delirium prevention in ICU patients. By highlighting expert- endorsed priorities, it supports a more focused allocation of research efforts and funding. The findings may inform the development of targeted, evidence- based prevention strategies, ultimately contributing to improved clinical outcomes in critical care settings.

# Introduction

Delirium is an acute disturbance of consciousness characterized by reduced orientation and impaired attention that cannot be explained by existing neurocognitive disorders or decreased consciousness [1]. Other cognitive functions may also be impaired, including language, memory, executive functioning, and perception. Delirium onset is relatively rapid with symptoms fluctuating throughout the day and night [2,3]. Symptomatology may vary according to delirium subtypes [4]. Hyperactive delirium is easily identifiable as it is characterized by increased psychomotor activity, including agitation, emotional lability, and hallucinations. Hypoactive delirium involves decreased psychomotor activity, including lethargy, decreased responsiveness, and slow motor skills. The subtle signs may delay recognition despite this subtype being quite prevalent in ICU patients. A third subtype involves mixed delirium which exhibits periods of agitation with periods of lethargy. The fluctuating nature makes it more challenging to categorize patients, requiring frequent and systematic assessment.

Precipitating factors of delirium include metabolic disturbances, pain, prolonged mechanical ventilation, respiratory failure, shock, immobility, sedatives, and conditions impairing hearing, sleep, and vision [5- 8]. Predisposing factors comprise hypertension, sepsis, cardiac disease, premorbid dementia, frailty and smoking [5,9- 12]. Most patients have both precipitating and predisposing factors [13,14]. The pathophysiologic basis of delirium has, however, yet to be fully elucidated.

In ICUs, delirium occurs frequently [15,16]. A recent systematic review and meta- analysis by Nan- Nan Wu et al. reported an incidence of 31 per 1000 ICU patients and a prevalence of  $33\%$  [17]. Hypoactive delirium is most prevalent subtype accounting for  $50.2\%$  of cases  $(95\%)$  confidence interval [CI], 46.0- 54.7), followed by mixed delirium with  $27.7\%$ $(95\%)$  CI, 24.1- 31.3), and hyperactive delirium being least prevalent with  $22.7\%$ $(95\%)$  CI, 19.0- 26.5) [4]. ICU delirium is associated with adverse outcomes including increased mortality, prolonged hospital stay, long- term cognitive impairment, and reduced quality- of- life after ICU discharge [5,18- 20]. Despite the availability of adequate screening tools such as the Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (CAM- ICU) and the Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC), delirium still often goes undiagnosed, and consequently, untreated [21- 23].

Despite substantial research efforts to prevent ICU delirium, high certainty evidence remains scare, i.e., evidence for which further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimated effects [24]. The potential to target different pathological pathways, plethora of potential interventions, both pharmacological and nonpharmacological, and heterogeneity in ICU patient delirium risk profiles, provide an abundance of research opportunities to expand the evidence- base for ICU delirium prevention.

This study aimed to gain expert consensus on topics considered as research priorities, thus informing the research agenda for the prevention of delirium in ICUs worldwide. An expert- endorsed research agenda may support a more focused allocation of resources for clinical researchers in intensive care.

# Methods

# Study design and definitions

We conducted an iterative, consensus- based modified Delphi methodology combined with initial literature search to establish a prioritized research agenda. The Delphi procedure was conducted between April 2022 and January 2023. This paper is reported according to the REPRISE guideline for the reporting of health research priorities settings [25]. We adopted the definition of research priority determination by Nasser and Crowe which describes a collective process for assessing which uncertainties hold the highest value for further research. These uncertainties involve both understanding unsolved problems and evaluating potential solutions. Using this framework, we systematically assessed and prioritized key research gaps in ICU delirium risk reduction, ensuring that the identified priorities were both relevant and actionable [26].

# Identifying evidence gaps

To generate a list of potential research priorities, two investigators (SBe & LV) identified single component interventions for preventing delirium with perceived evidence being absent, minimal, or inconclusive. As a first stage, an established guideline and four recent reviews were considered [2,27- 30]. Any potential research priority identified was then further explored using a targeted MEDLINE search and the following search string: (delirium AND (ICU OR intensive care OR critical care) AND (prevention OR risk reduction) AND \*), with \* indicating the potential research priority. Other potential research priorities discovered during the targeted searches was also collated. Finally, other potential research priorities were generated during team discussions (SBe, LV, SL, SBI).

Potential research priorities were formulated as simple research questions indicating the preventive intervention and the outcome (i.e., delirium). For each intervention identified, a short summary of the state of the science and the theoretical preventive potential was generated. Interventions were categorized according to the following domains: exercise and mobilization, pharmacological interventions, organizational interventions, interventions promoting communication and providing information, non- pharmacological interventions promoting circadian rhythm and sleep or targeting mindfulness and anxiety.

# Project lead & assembling the expert panel

The project was steered by two head investigators (SBl and SL) experienced in intensive care research. They coached two medical students who executed this project as part of their master's theses (SBe, LV). We invited 13 internationally experts, either physicians or nurses, selected for their academic and clinical expertise in the field of ICU delirium to join an expert panel. Panel members needed to have at least 4 years of clinical experience in an ICU and were required to have at least one scientific article on the topic as first or senior author in a top- ranking journal (i.e., The Lancet, New England Journal of Medicine, JAMA, Intensive Care Medicine, Critical Care Medicine, Critical Care, International Journal of Nursing Studies, or Intensive & Critical Care Nursing). Relevant literature was reviewed to identify potential candidates, with deliberate consideration given to including expertise in both pharmacological and non- pharmacological approaches to delirium prevention. A minimum of ten members was deemed necessary to constitute the expert panel [31]. Potential candidates for joining the panel were contacted by Participation in the expert panel was entirely voluntary, and panel members were invited to contribute to the final manuscript. Anonymity among panel members was maintained until the first draft of the manuscript was circulated. At no point did panel members have access to each other's suggestions during the first Delphi round, nor to individual rankings of potential research priorities during the second round. The head investigators only shared previous collaboration with a single panel member (LR) and not on the matter of delirium.

# Modified Delphi procedure and data processing

We planned three Delphi rounds. For each round we provided the study objectives and content of the respective round, the deadline, and subsequent steps. We sent two completion reminders per round.

In the first round, experts were asked to consider the list of potential research priorities generated from our review work and to add additional topics they deemed missing and of potential interest together with a rationale for their inclusion. Panel members were asked to articulate

the items in the format of a research question. All suggestions were considered valid if they met the scope of the project. The second round aimed to identify topics experts considered as key research priorities. Participants scored each research topic using a 4- point Likert scale, ranging from very low to very high priority, thus excluding ambivalent middle rankings.

Expert scoring were processed using an adjustment of the method of determination and quantification of content validity [32]. This requires a predetermined number of experts within a panel to rate an item of a newly developed measurement tool as "high" or "very high" to be content valid. We used the ratio set by Lynn (1986) to determine the number of experts rating a topic as "high priority" or "very high priority" for an

Table 1 Potl  t t first Delphi round (an e-supplement) reports the list of potential research priorities (including the supporting rationales).  

<table><tr><td>Potential research priorities</td></tr><tr><td>Exercise &amp;amp; Mobilization</td></tr><tr><td>Does early mobilization prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do physical exercise interventions prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Pharmacological interventions</td></tr><tr><td>Does treatment with IL-6 antagonists prevents delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does treatment with Janus kinase inhibitors in addition to IL-antagonists prevents delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does melatonin prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does ramelteon prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does tryptophan prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does suvorexant prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does ketamine prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does haloperidol prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does dexmedetomidine prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does risperidone prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does treatment with statins prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Do cholinesterase inhibitors prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Does paracetamol prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Does treatment with quetiapine prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Do sedation breaks for ventilator weaning prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Organizational interventions</td></tr><tr><td>Does continuous professional education for nurses prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does routine surveillance of delirium prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does an attending clinical pharmacist in the ICU prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do single-bed hospital rooms compared with multi-bed rooms prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do delirium prediction models prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Do access to outdoor space prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Interventions promoting communication &amp;amp; providing information</td></tr><tr><td>Does augmentative and alternative communication prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does providing information prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does healing communication prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does psychological care prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does cognitive training/exercise prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Non-pharmacological interventions promoting circadian rhythm and sleep or targeting restlessness and anxiety</td></tr><tr><td>Does &#x27;bright light&#x27; application therapy prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does natural light prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Does massage therapy prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does healing therapeutic touch prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does nightly light reduction prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do the use of eye masks at night prevent delirium? *</td></tr><tr><td>Does nightly noise reduction prevent of delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does reduction of care activities at night prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does music therapy prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does aroma therapy prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does hypnosis prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does spirituality or religion prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Interventions targeting noise overload</td></tr><tr><td>Does a continuous indicating overload of decibel level prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does the use of noise shields prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do earplugs prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do active noise-cancelling headphones prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does changing the spectrum of alarm sounds prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does moving the alarm sounds away from the bedside prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does reduced reverberation time in an ICU room prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Family-based interventions</td></tr><tr><td>Do open visitation hours prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does family participation in care prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does personalized care prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do family recordings played for ICU patients prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Miscellaneous</td></tr><tr><td>Does acupuncture prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does cyber therapy prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does eye tracking technology prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Does an animal-assisted intervention prevent delirium?</td></tr><tr><td>Do robotic pets prevent delirium?</td></tr></table>

\* Topics added by the experts.

intervention to be retained (i.e., being a research priority). All potential research priorities needed to be rated by all panel members to avoid missing data.

We planned a third and final Delphi round asking experts to provide their top- 3 ranking, if round 2 resulted in more than ten research priorities.

# Results

# Item generation

The item generation phase resulted in identification of 44 potential research priorities for delirium prevention in adult ICU patients.

Table 2 Results Delphi Round 2: distribution of priority ranking by experts.  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Research question</td><td colspan="4">Primary ranking by experts (n = 10)</td><td rowspan="2">Ranking high for very high</td><td rowspan="2">Priority by consensus*</td></tr><tr><td>Very low</td><td>Low</td><td>High</td><td>Very high</td></tr><tr><td>Exercise &amp;amp; Mobilization</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does early mobilization prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>9/10</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Do physical exercise interventions prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>6</td><td>9/10</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Pharmacological interventions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does treatment with IL-6 antagonists prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>3</td><td>3/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does treatment with Janus kinase inhibitors in addition to IL-antagonists prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does melatonin prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does ramelteon prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>5/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does tryptophan prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>3</td><td>3/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does sumoxane prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>4/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does ketamine prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>6/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does haloperidol prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does dexmedetomidine prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>6/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does risperidone prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>4/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does a statin prevent ICU delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>8</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Do cholinesterase inhibitors prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>7</td><td>1</td><td>1/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does Paracetamol, also known as acetaminophen, prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>1/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does quetiapine prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>5/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Do sedation breaks for ventilator weaning prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>8/10</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Organizational interventions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does continuous professional education for nurses prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>7/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does routine surveillance of delirium prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>8/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does an attending clinical pharmacist in the ICU prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>5/10</td></tr><tr><td>Do single-bed hospital rooms compared with multi-bed rooms prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>5/10</td></tr><tr><td>Do delirium prediction models prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>1</td><td>6/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does access to outdoor space prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>5/10</td></tr><tr><td>Interventions promoting communication &amp;amp; providing information</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does augmentative and alternative communication prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>3</td><td>6</td><td>1</td><td>7/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does providing information prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>5</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>4/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does healing communication prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>3/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does psychological care prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>5/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does cognitive training/exercise prevent ICU delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>8/10</td></tr><tr><td>Non-pharmacological interventions promoting circadian rhythm and sleep or targeting restlessness and anxiety</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does bright light application therapy prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>1</td><td>7/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does natural light prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>5/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does massage therapy prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does healing/therapeutic touch prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does nightly light reduction prevent delirium in adult ICU patients?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>8</td><td>1</td><td>9/10</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Does nightly noise reduction prevent delirium in adult ICU patients?</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does reduction of care activities at night prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does music therapy prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does aroma therapy prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>1</td><td>1/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does hypnosis prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does spirituality or religion prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Interventions targeting noise overload</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does a continuous indication of the decibel level prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td>5</td><td>1</td><td>6/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does the use of noise shields prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>5/10</td></tr><tr><td>Do earplugs prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>6/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Do active noise-cancelling headphones prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>4/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does changing the spectrum of alarm sounds prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>6/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does moving the alarm sounds away from the bedside prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>5/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does reduced reverberation time in an ICU room prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Family-based interventions</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Do open visitation hours prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>2</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>8/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does family participation in care prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>6</td><td>3</td><td>9/10</td></tr><tr><td>Does personalized care prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>7</td><td>7/10</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td>Do family recordings played for ICU patients prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>6/10</td></tr><tr><td>Miscellaneous</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Does acupuncture prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does cyber therapy prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>8</td><td>1</td><td>1/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does eye tracking technology prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>6</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td>Does an animal-assisted intervention prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>2</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>3/10</td></tr><tr><td>Do robotic pets prevent delirium?</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>2/10</td><td>No</td></tr></table>

# Expert panel

Expert panelTen of the thirteen  $(77\%)$  invited experts agreed to participate. Of these, seven had a nursing background, and three were physicians. Experts were from Australia  $(n = 1)$ , Belgium  $(n = 1)$ , Denmark  $(n = 1)$ , France  $(n = 1)$ , Germany  $(n = 1)$ , Hong Kong  $(n = 1)$ , the Netherlands  $(n = 1)$ , UK  $(n = 1)$ , and USA  $(n = 2)$ . Following a panel with 10 experts, consensus was achieved when  $80\%$  of panel members agreed on a topic to be of high or very high priority [32].

# First Delphi round

First Delphi roundDuring round 1, the panel added 9 more topics to the list of 44. As such, the first Delphi round resulted in 53 potential research priorities (Table 1). Suggested potential research priorities, including their rationale, added to Delphi round 2 can be found in the e- Supplement.

# Second Delphi round

Second Delphi roundOf the 53 potential research priorities, 8 reached consensus (Table 2). These research priorities were early mobilization, exercise interventions, sedation breaks for ventilator weaning, routine delirium surveillance, cognitive training/exercise, nightly reduction of light, noise and care activities, open visitation hours, and family participation. Two of these ('sedation breaks for ventilator weaning' and 'cognitive training/exercise') were suggested by panel members during the first Delphi round.

# Third Delphi round

Third Delphi roundGiven only eight topics met the threshold for being considered a research priority, we did not require a third Delphi round.

# Discussion

# Summary of findings

In this study, experts unanimously established a research agenda for the prevention of ICU delirium by identifying eight single interventions as research priorities.

# Early mobilization

Early mobilizationImmobilization during critical illness is a known risk factor for developing delirium [33]. The importance of early mobilization to prevent delirium is blurred, as it is often part of a multicomponent intervention (e.g., the ABCDE(I) bundle) [2,34- 37]. Early mobilization as a single component intervention to prevent ICU delirium has not yet been extensively researched [38]. A recent systematic review and meta- analysis summarizing 13 studies  $(n = 2164$  patients) concluded that early mobilization was associated with prevention of delirium (odds ratio [OR] 0.53,  $95\%$  confidence interval [CI] 0.34- 0.83) [39]. However, when evaluated as a single component intervention, the effect of early mobilization was no longer significant with conflicting certainty of evidence. Insufficient research has been conducted to demonstrate an unequivocal result, hence this research question was considered as high priority by the expert panel.

# Exercise interventions

In a recent meta- analysis, eleven studies were analyzed, focusing on exercise as a standalone intervention to prevent delirium in ICU patients [40]. The results revealed that physical exercise interventions prevented delirium OR 0.23,  $95\%$  CI 0.09- 0.64), emphasizing the efficacy of exercise as an individual intervention. Notably, the study highlighted exercise as the nonpharmacological intervention with the largest effect size for delirium, leading to reduced incidence and duration.

Despite the current body of evidence stressing the significance of physical exercise in delirium prevention, the panel acknowledged the necessity to further explore this intervention. Consequently, future research should focus on terms of specific exercise modalities and training schemes applied to diverse ICU populations. These explorations should consider variables such as the starting time of exercise, patient risk profile, type of exercise, duration of exercise, and overcoming particular barriers for mobilization [41]. This exploration will be essential to deepen current knowledge of the mechanisms through which exercise prevents delirium, thereby paving the way for tailored evidence- based interventions in ICU settings.

# Sedation breaks for ventilator weaning

Sedation breaks for ventilator weaningContinuous sedation administration is a risk factor for delirium and is used in the intensive care unit, for example in patients receiving ECMO (extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support) [42- 44]. Daily sedative awakening trials are sometimes used to facilitate ventilator weaning and may play a role in delirium prevention. However, sedation should be carefully titrated to the lowest dosage possible as sedation vacations can result in complications due to anxiety and/or confusion. Khan et al. compared patients with and without daily sedation vacation and spontaneous breathing trials and did not find a decrease in the incidence of delirium [42]. In a network meta- analysis, Burry et al. compared daily sedation interruption with no daily sedation interruption through a systematic review and meta- analysis and pooled three moderate quality evidence studies describing no significant effect on new onset delirium [28]. Notwithstanding the inconclusive result derived from a systematic review, the experts believe there is still a potential to find a link between individualized sedation breaks and the prevention of delirium. As there is a need for prevention and treatment programs for complex patient populations such as patients receiving ECMO, future research has to make clear which patient profiles, if any, may benefit from a more pro- active sedation break strategy while for others a more conservative weaning approach may be beneficial [44,45].

# Routine surveillance

Routine surveillanceRoutine surveillance of delirium and handling the rate as a quality indicator with regular feedback to the team may increase awareness and sharpen the attention for this complication. Such an approach has been demonstrated to be effective to increase adherence with evidence- based measures to prevent healthcare- associated infections [46,47]. To the best of our knowledge no research data are available in the field of delirium prevention, hence the importance of investigating the benefits of routine delirium surveillance on delirium incidence rates. van der Hoeven et al. for example observed a change in sleep pattern ahead of delirium onset. Implementing consistent sleep monitoring during routine surveillance could be vital to develop an effective strategy [48]. Aside from the potential direct effect of a delirium surveillance system, the collection of such data may additionally serve other epidemiological investigations over longer periods of time.

# Cognitive training/exercise

Prehabilitation with cognitive training emerges as a promising intervention, potentially increasing cognitive reserve and safeguarding ICU patients against perioperative neurocognitive disorders [49]. Humeidan et al. observed a decrease in postoperative delirium, from 23  $\%$  to  $13.2\%$ $(\mathtt{p} = 0.04)$  , among patients following a tablet- based preoperative cognitive exercise program. Their findings demonstrate the potential that at least minimal participation in preoperative computerized cognitive exercise may prevent delirium [50].

In a study by O'Gara et al. emphasis was on the feasibility of a cognitive training program, evaluating enrolment patterns and protocol adherence [51]. Participants reported significant memory (median [interquartile range], 75 [54- 82] vs. 51 [49- 54];  $\mathrm{P} = 0.01$  ) and thinking ability (median [interquartile range], 78 [64- 83] vs. 50 [41- 68];  $\mathrm{P} =$  0.01) improvements, confirming the benefits of cognitive training. This

study concluded that cognitive prehabilitation in older cardiac surgery patients, holds potential for the prevention of postoperative delirium.

Wassenaar et al. found that cognitive training exercises were feasible for nurses and ICU patients, including cooperative patients with delirium [52]. Preoperative home- based cognitive training interventions, however, were found unlikely to be feasible for older patients [53]. Optimizing activities, timing, and dosage for cognitive exercise- based interventions to prevent delirium remains unexplored. Consequently, tailored cognitive training is considered a research priority, holding the potential for substantial prevention of ICU delirium.

Nightly light reduction, use of eye masks, nightly noise reduction, and reduction of care activities at night.

Generally, interventions to reduce external stimuli and/or to promote the circadian rhythm are investigated in a bundle approach and reveal conflicting results [54,55]. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the individual value of the bundle elements. The use of eye masks for sleep promotion and delirium prevention in the ICU has repeatedly been investigated in combination with the use of earplugs, and - to the best of our knowledge - have not been investigated as a single intervention [56,57]. In addition, most studies did not quantify the reductions in light levels, noise levels, and staff interactions.

In a quality improvement initiative study, Patel et al. [58] reduced sound at night by 7db, light intensity by  $290\mathrm{lx}$  and the number of awakenings caused by care activities from 11 to 9. The bundle approach led to an increased mean sleep efficiency index, reduced mean sound and light levels, and reduced awakenings caused by care activities. Delirium incidence dropped from  $33\%$  to  $14\%$ $(p< 0.001)$ . Because of the bundle approach, the contribution of the individual bundle components remains unclear. Research focused on specific bundle items can bring insights about which interventions are to be enforced, and which are redundant. Another iteration is to identify the causal relationship between onset delirium and these bundle items using a structural equitation model in a larger cohort study. This gives opportunity to examine the additive relationship between elements of these interventions. While the objective of this research agenda- generating exercise was to exclusively define standalone interventions, these three were pooled as it seems logical merge interventions targeting the avoidance or blocking of sensory stimuli. In other words, it is of little value to use eye masks in a particularly noisy environment.

# Open visitation hours

Absence of visitors is often a risk factor for delirium in ICU patients (OR 3.73,  $95\%$  CI 1.75- 7.93) [59]. Therefore, extended visitation policies could help to prevent delirium. Rosa et al. explored the effect of partial liberation of visiting policies (12 h/day) on delirium in ICU patients in a single- centre, before- and- after study [60]. Following transition to the extended visitation policy, delirium rates dropped from 20.5  $\%$  to  $9.6\%$  . However, the authors were unable to replicate these results in a large- scaled multicentre RCT [61] which is in line with the study of Bauer et al. [62]. Westphal et al. explored the effect of a 24- hour visitation policy on delirium, compared with a 6- hour visiting window [63]. A reduction in delirium was observed in the 24- hour visitation group  $12.1\%$  vs.  $6.7\%$ $\mathbf{p} = 0.03)$

Given the contradictory evidence, it can be inferred that the association between family presence and delirium incidence in the ICU is complex and prone to contextual circumstances. Despite the many objections articulated in the past (mainly infection risks, increased stress for the patients and family members, etc.), there is no scientific basis for limiting family presence in the ICU. In addition, open visiting policies are an almost zero cost measure that can be easily implemented [64].

# Family participation

Family interventions have long been overlooked to prevent delirium. The ABCDE bundle presents evidence- based guidelines to approach the organizational changes needed for optimizing ICU recovery and outcomes. ABCDE is an acronym that stands for Assess, prevent, and manage pain; Both spontaneous awakening trials and spontaneous Breathing trials; Choice of sedation/analgesia; Delirium monitoring and management: Early mobility and exercise. The Society of Critical Care Medicine recommended a revision and expanded the bundle by adding "Family engagement and empowerment", resulting in the present ABCDEF bundle [29]. Family participation is considered essential for good clinical practice. Family members may play a role in the prevention of ICU- acquired delirium as they can reduce confusion and offer emotional support, improving patients' courage and confidence. Their participation could decrease feelings of isolation by connecting the patients to the outside world [65]. One Australian feasibility study evaluated a multicomponent family intervention that contained three key components: orientation- memory, cluster, therapeutic engagement, and sensory checks [66]. The intervention was positively evaluated by nurses and participating family members, but no difference in delirium was observed. On the other hand, Eghbali- Babadi et al. did a similar intervention with 68 patients in a cardiovascular surgery ICU [67]. Family was encouraged to put on or give their loved ones their glasses and hearing aids (if relevant), to be near their beds, to holding hands, orientate them in location, date, and time, explain the reason for being in the ICU, and lastly, to bring in some personal and meaningful attributes from home (e.g., pictures). Compared with the control group, patients in the intervention group experienced less delirium at the 2nd  $(\mathbf{p} = 0.04)$  and 3rd day post- surgery  $(\mathbf{p} = 0.03)$ . The overall value of family participation is established, and the diverging study results make it appealing to further investigate how precisely family presence can contribute to delirium prevention (contact time, type of activities, etc.).

# Implications and Recommendations

The research priorities identified in this study have only been investigated to a limited extent, and one topic (surveillance), to the best of our knowledge, has not been studied before. Those studies that do address these topics often focussed on narrow contexts, for example post- operative settings, and frequently report inconclusive or conflicting outcomes. The panel identified these as a priority for further research. Many studies focus on delirium prevention following surgery. Since surgery is merely one of a myriad of risk factors, we recommend researchers to consider a broader study population, including ICU patients, and sensitivity analyses for particular risk profiles. Future directions may involve presenting the results to patients and their family, as their opinion could be of value for opening a broader spectrum of research topics through their perspectives. Expanding the panel and thereby including a broader range of disciplines may lead to identifying a more balanced representation of research topics. Our study aimed to assess the perceived priority of single component interventions. However, this was only done with the aim to have a straightforward process of evaluating the topics. We acknowledge the value of combining interventions and believe that adding a multicomponent delirium care bundle alongside the ABCDEF bundle could encourage a culture of multidisciplinary collaboration, thereby increasing awareness and focus [68].

# Limitations

The outcome of a modified Delphi procedure relies on the participating experts. The panel, assembled for this study, consisted of ten members. The viewpoint of each participant was weighted equally during the modified Delphi procedure, with no expert having knowledge of each other's opinions. This approach was implemented to minimize potential peer pressure. With opinions of different panellists sometimes varying widely, this results in exclusion of topics which are considered very high priority by several experts. Ketamine, dexmedetomidine and continuous professional education are examples of topics which did not reach the threshold while  $30\%$  (3/10) of the panellists gave these

interventions a 'very high' priority recommendation (Table 2). A larger panel, including other allied healthcare professionals, could mitigate this variability and potentially result in a different set of research priorities. The panel also did not include members from important geographic areas such as India, mainland China, South America or Africa and therefore cannot be considered representative for all stakeholders worldwide. By publishing the outcomes of this research agenda in an international journal, we aim to broadly disseminate these insights, inviting further reflection and dialogue within the global scientific community. Due to practical constraints, our current panel did not include any patients or family members. With this strong, but limited panel and no participation of patients or family, important aspects could have been overlooked.

# Conclusion

This project aimed to establish an agenda for future research on the prevention of delirium in adult ICU patients. The research priorities identified include early mobilization, exercise interventions, sedation breaks for ventilator weaning, routine surveillance, cognitive training/ exercise, a combination of reduced light, noise, and care activities at night, open visitation hours, and family participation. The panelists reached consensus that these interventions warrant further investigation to establish a clear and coherent understanding of their effectiveness.

Other potential research priorities proposed in the first Delphi round should not be dismissed, as panelists' views varied, and evolving insights may shift the relevance of specific questions over time.

This work provides a structured foundation for advancing the field by identifying key areas of uncertainty and consensus. It offers a roadmap for researchers to align future studies with the needs and perspectives of clinical experts, potentially enhancing the relevance and applicability of findings. For funding bodies and policymakers, it highlights priority areas where investment may yield the greatest impact. Clinically, this agenda may help guide the development of more targeted and evidence- informed strategies for delirium prevention, ultimately improving outcomes for critically ill patients.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Stef Beerens: Writing - original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Laurens Van Steenkiste: Writing - original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Ingrid Egerod: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Thomas Gargadenec: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Mu- Hsing Ho: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Peter Nydahl: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Jessica A. Palakshappa: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Brenda Pun: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Louise Rose: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Mark van den Boogaard: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Bart Van Rompaey: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Bradley Wibrow: Writing - review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Sonia O. Labeau: Writing - original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Stijn Blot: Writing - original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

# Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Stijn Blot is Editor- in- Chief for Intensive & Critical Care Nursing and was not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish this article. Mark van den Boogaard and Mu- Hsing Ho are Associate- Editors for Intensive & Critical Care Nursing and were not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish this article.

# Clinical trial registration

Not applicable.

Funding source information

None.

Ethics statement

Not applicable.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iccn.2025.104124.

# References

[1] Association AP. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing: 2013. [2] Stollings JL, Kotfis K, Chanques G, Pun BT, Pauljaripande PP, Ely EW. Delirium in critical illness: clinical manifestations, outcomes, and management. Intensive Care Med 2021;47(10):1089- 103. [3] Kalish VB, Gillham JE, Unwin BK. Delirium in older persons: evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician 2014;90(3):150- 8. [4] la Cour KN, Andersen- Ranberg NC, Weihe S, Poulsen LM, Mortensen CB, Kjer CKW, et al. Distribution of delirium motor subtypes in the intensive care unit: a systematic scoping review. Crit Care 2022;26(1):53. [5] Mart MF, Roberson SW, Salas B, Pandharipande PP, Ely EW. Prevention and management of delirium in the intensive care unit. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2021;42(01):112- 26. [6] Staicu RE, Vernic C, Ciurescu S, Lascu A, Aburel OM, Deutsch P, et al. Postoperative delirium and cognitive dysfunction after Cardiac surgery: the role of inflammation and clinical risk factors. Diagnostics (van der 2025;15(7):844. [7] Smit L, Wiegers EJA, Trogrlic Z, Gommers L, Ista E, van der Jagt M. Risk factors for transitions and outcomes of subsyndromal delirium in the ICU: post- hoc analysis of a prospective multicenter cohort study. J Crit Care 2025;88:155041. [8] Liu C, Ji X, Lu J, Zhong L, Hu J, Wang Y, et al. Assessment of sleep quality using cardiopulmonary coupling and its predictive value for delirium in ICU patients. Sleep Med 2025;126:222- 7. [9] Igwe EO, Ding P, Nealon J, Charlton K, Traynor V. Comorbidities and delirium in older chronic kidney disease patients admitted to the intensive care unit: a data linkage study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2024;80:103550. [10] Zheng G, Yan J, Li W, Chen Z. Frailty as an independent risk factor for sepsis- associated delirium: a cohort study of 11,740 older adult ICU patients. Aging Clin Exp Res 2025;37(1):52. [11] Jayaswal AK, Sampath H, Soohinda G, Dutta S. Delirium in medical intensive care units: incidence, subtypes, risk factors, and outcome. Indian J Psychiatry 2019;61(4):352- 8. [12] Li HR, Guo Y. High- risk factors for delirium in severely ill patients and the application of emotional nursing combined with pain nursing. World J Psychiatry 2024;14(7):1027- 33. [13] Wilson JE, Mart MF, Cunningham C, Shehabi Y, Girard TD, MacLullich AM, et al. Delirium. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2020;6(1):90. [14] Ormseth CH, LaHue SC, Oldham MA, Josephson SA, Whitaker E, Douglas VC. Reviewing and precipitating factors associated with delirium: a systematic predisposition. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6(1):e224950. [15] Roberts B, Rickard CM, Rajbhandari D, Turner G, Clarke J, Hill D, et al. Multicentre study of delirium in ICU patients using a simple screening tool. Aust Crit Care 2005;18(1):6- 16. [16] Ely EW, Margolin R, Francis J, May L, Truman B, Dittus R, et al. Evaluation of delirium in critically ill patients: validation of the confusion assessment method for the intensive Care unit (CAM- ICU). Crit Care Med 2001;29(7):1370- 9. [17] Wu N- N, Zhang Y- B, Wang S- Y, Zhao Y- H, Zhong X- M. Incidence, prevalence and risk factors of delirium in ICU patients: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Nurs Crit Care 2023;28(5):653- 69. [18] Su LJ, Chen MJ, Yang R, Zou H, Chen TT, Li SL, et al. Investigating the correlation of delirium after cardiac surgery with memories and posttraumatic stress disorder consequences of intensive care unit: a prospective cohort study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2024;82:103632.

[19] Salluh JI, Wang H, Schneider EB, Nagaraja N, Yenokyan G, Damluji A, et al. Outcome of delirium in critically ill patients: systematic review and meta- analysis. BMJ 2015;350:h2538. [20] Klein Klouwenberg PMC, Zaal IJ, Spitoni C, Ong DSY, van der Kooi AW, Bonten MJM, et al. The attributable mortality of delirium in critically ill patients: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2014;349:g6652. [21] Biyabanaki F, Arab M, Dehghan M. Iranian nurses perception and Practices for delirium assessment in intensive Care units. Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine 2020;24(10):955. [22] van den Boogaard M, Zegers M. Delirium in ICU patients with COVID- 19. any difference? Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2021;64:103029. [23] van den Boogaard MV, Leenders M, Pep- Purcaleanu M, Tilburgs B. Performance and validation of two ICU delirium assessment and severity tools; a prospective observational study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2024;83:103627. [24] Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck- Ytter Y, Alonso- Coello P, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008;336(7650):924- 6. [25] Tong A, Synnot A, Crowe S, Hill S, Matus A, Scholes- Robertson N, et al. Reporting guideline for priority setting of health research (REPRISE). BMC Med Res Method 2019;19(1):243. [26] Nasser M, Crowe S. An introduction to research priority setting (RPS) for research groups in the Cochrane collaboration. Cochrane Collaboration 2018. [27] Bannon L, McGaughey J, Verghit R, Clarke M, McAuley DF, Blackwood B. The effectiveness of non- pharmacological interventions in reducing the incidence and duration of delirium in critically ill patients: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Intensive Care Med 2019;45:1- 12. [28] Burry LD, Cheng W, Williamson DR, Adhikari NK, Egerod I, Kanji S, et al. Pharmacological and non- pharmacological interventions to prevent delirium in critically ill patients: a systematic review and network meta- analysis. Intensive Care Med 2021;47(9):943- 60. [29] Devlin JW, Skrobik Y, Gelinas C, Needham DM, Slooter AJ, Pandharipande PP, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the prevention and management of pain, agitation/sedation, delirium, immobility, and sleep disruption in adult patients in the ICU. Crit Care Med 2018;46(9):e825- 73. [30] Seo Y, Lee H- J, Ha EJ, Ha TS. 2021 KSCCM clinical practice guidelines for pain, agitation, delirium, immobility, and sleep disturbance in the intensive care unit. Acute and Critical Care 2022;37(1):1- 25. [31] Okoli C, Pawlowski SD. The Delphim Method as a research tool: an example, design considerations and applications. Int Manag 2004;42(1):15- 29. [32] Lynn MR. Determination and quantification of content validity. Nurs Res 1986;35 (6):382- 6. [33] Inouye SK, Bogardus Jr ST, Charpentier PA, Leo- Summers L, Acampora D, Holford TR, et al. A multicomponent intervention to prevent delirium in hospitalized older patients. N Engl J Med 1999;340(9):669- 76. [34] Balas MC, Vasilevskis EE, Olsen KM, Schmid KK, Shostrom V, Cohen MZ, et al. Effectiveness and safety of the awakening and breathing coordination, delirium monitoring/management, and early exercise/mobility (ABCDE) bundle. Crit Care Med 2014;42(5):1024. [35] Hashem MD, Nelliot A, Needham DM. Early mobilization and rehabilitation in the ICU: moving back to the future. Respir Care 2016;61(7):971- 9. [36] Brummel N, Girard T, Ely E, Pardharipande P, Morandi A, Hughes C, et al. Feasibility and safety of early combined cognitive and physical therapy for critically ill medical and surgical patients: the activity and cognitive therapy in ICU (ACT- ICU) trial. Intensive Care Med 2014;40:370- 9. [37] Barnes- Daly MA, Phillips G, Ely EW. Improving hospital survival and reducing brain dysfunction at seven California community hospitals: implementing PAD guidelines via the ABCDEF bundle in 6,064 patients. Crit Care Med 2017;45(2): 171- 8. [38] Hoyer EH, Friedman M, Lavezza A, Wagner- Kosmakos K, Lewis- Cherry R, Skolnik JL, et al. Promoting mobility and reducing length of stay in hospitalized general medicine patients: a quality- improvement project. J Hosp Med 2016;11(5): 341- 7. [39] Nydahl P, Jeitzner M- M, Vater V, Senerajah S, Howroyd F, McWilliams D, et al. Early mobilisation for prevention and treatment of delirium in critically ill patients: systematic review and meta- analysis. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2023;74: 103334. [40] Kang J, Cho YS, Lee M, Yun S, Jeong YJ, Won Y- H, et al. Effects of nonpharmacological interventions on sleep improvement and delirium prevention in critically ill patients: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Aust Crit Care 2023;36(4):640- 9. [41] Dubb R, Nydahl P, Hermes C, Schwabauer N, Toonstra A, Parker AM, et al. Barriers and strategies for early mobilization of patients in intensive care units. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2016;13(5):734- 30. [42] Khan BA, Fadel WF, Tricker JL, Carlos WG, Farber MO, Hui SL, et al. Effectiveness of implementing a wake up and breathe program on sedation and delirium in the intensive Care unit. Crit Care Med 2014;42(12):e791.

[43] Sharma S, Hashmi MF, Valentino III DJ. Sedation vacation in the ICU. StatPearls (internet). Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025. [44] Shah MD, Palakshappa JA. Delirium in recipients of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support: identifying a population in need. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2023;79:103529. [45] Ho MH, Lee JJ, Lai PCK, Li PWC. Prevalence of delirium among critically ill patients who received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation therapy: a systematic review and proportional meta- analysis. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2023;79:103498. [46] Condon RE, Schulte WJ, Malangoni MA, Anderson- Teschendorf MJ. Effectiveness of a surgical wound surveillance program. Arch Surg 1983;118(3):303- 7. [47] Haley RW, Culver DH, White JW, Morgan WM, Emori TG, Munn VP, et al. The efficacy of infection surveillance and control programs in preventing nosocomial infections in US hospitals. American journal of epidemiology. 1985;121(2):182- 205. [48] van der Hoeven AE, Bijlenga D, van der Hoeven E, Schinkelshoek MS, Hiemstra FW, Kervezee L, et al. Sleep in the intensive and intermediate care units: exploring related factors of delirium, benzodiazepine use and mortality. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2024;81:103603. [49] Rengel KF, Boncyk CS, Hughes CG. Postoperative delirium prevention and novel cognitive therapy interventions. Curr Anesthesiol Rep 2022;12(1):88- 98. [50] Hulaeidan ML, Reyes J- P- C, Alvarez- Martinez A, Roeth C, Nguyen CM, Sheridan E, et al. Effect of cognitive prehabilitation on the incidence of postoperative delirium among older adults undergoing major non- cardiac surgery: the neurotics randomized clinical trial. JAMA Surg 2021;156(2):148- 56. [51] O'Gara BP, Mueller A, Gasangwa DVI, Pattiot M, Shaefi S, Khabbaz K, et al. Prevention of early postoperative decline: a randomized, controlled feasibility trial of perioperative cognitive training. Anesth Analg 2020;130(3):586. [52] Wassenaar A, Rood P, Boelen D, Schoonhoven L, Pickkers P, Van den Boogaard M. Feasibility of cognitive training in critically ill patients: a pilot study. Am J Crit Care 2018;27(2):124- 35. [53] Visides P, Avidan M. Recent advances in preventing and managing postoperative delirium. F100Research. 2019;8F1000 Faculty Rev- 607. [54] Bryczkowski SBO, Lopreato MC, Yonclacs PA, Sacca JJ, Mosenthal AC. Delirium prevention program in the surgical intensive care unit improved the outcomes of older adults. J Surg Res 2014;190(1):280- 8. [55] Kamdar BB, King LM, Collop NA, Sakamuri S, Colantuoni E, Neufeld KJ, et al. The effect of a quality improvement intervention on perceived sleep quality and cognition in a medical ICU. Crit Care Med 2014;41(3):800- 9. [56] Hu R- F, Jiang X- Y, Hegadoreu KM, Zhang Y- H, Effects of earplugs and eye masks combined with relaxing music on sleep, melatonin and cortisol levels in ICU patients: a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2015;19(1):1- 9. [57] Tonna JE, Dalton A, Presson AP, Zhang C, Colantuoni E, Lander K, et al. The effect of a quality improvement intervention on sleep and delirium in critically ill patients in a surgical ICU. Chest 2021;160(3):899- 908. [58] Patel J, Baldwin J, Bunting P, Laha S. The effect of a multicomponent multidisciplinary bundle of interventions on sleep and delirium in medical and surgical intensive care patients. Anaesthesia 2014;69(6):540- 9. [59] Van Rompaey B, Elseviers MM, Schuurmans MJ, Shortridge- Baggett LM, Truijen S, Bossaert L. Risk factors for delirium in intensive care patients: a prospective cohort study. Crit Care 2009;13(3):1- 12. [60] Rosa RG, Tonietto TF, da Silva DB, Gutierres FA, Ascoli AM, Madeira LC, et al. Effectiveness and safety of an extended ICU visitation model for delirium prevention: a before and after study. Crit Care Med 2017;45(10):1660- 7. [61] Rosa RG, Falavigna M, da Silva DB, Siganzula D, Santos MMS, Kochhann R, et al. Effect of flexible family visitation on delirium among patients in the intensive care unit: the ICU visits randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2019;322(3):216- 28. [62] Bauer PR, Rabinstein AA, Wilson ME. Family visitation policies in the ICU and delirium. JAMA 2019;322(19):1923- 4. [63] Westphal GA, Moerschberger MS, Vollmann DDA, Inacio AC, Machado MC, Sperotto G, et al. Effect of a 24- h extended- visiting policy on delirium in critically ill patients. Intensive Care Med 2018;44(6):968- 70. [64] Giannini A, Garrouste- Orgeas M, Latour JM. What's new in ICU visiting policies: can we continue to keep the doors closed? Intensive Care Med 2014;40(5):730- 3. [65] Ma Y, Cui N, Guo Z, Zhang Y, Jin J. Exploring patients' and families' preferences for auditory stimulation in ICU delirium prevention: a qualitative study. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2024;82:103629. [66] Mitchell ML, Kean S, Rattray JE, Hull AM, Davis C, Murfield JE, et al. A family intervention to reduce delirium in hospitalised ICU patients: a feasibility randomised controlled trial. Intensive Crit Care Nurs 2017;40:77- 84. [67] Eghbali- Babadi M, Shokrollahi N, Mehrabi T. Effect of family- patient communication on the incidence of delirium in hospitalized patients in cardiovascular surgery ICU. Iran J Nurs Midwifery Res 2017;22(4):327. [68] Palakshappa JA, Hough CL. How we prevent and treat delirium in the ICU. Chest 2021;160(4):1326- 34.