Research paper

# Non-pharmacological interventions to prevent falls in older patients: Clinical practice recommendations - the SENATOR ONTOP Series

J.M. Rimland a, 
I. Abraha a,\*, 
G. Dell'Aquila a, 
A. Cruz-Jentoft a, 
R.L. Soiza b, 
A. Gudmundsson c, 
M. Petrovic d, 
D. O'Mahony e, 
A. Cherubini f

a Geriatrics and Geriatric Emergency Care, Italian National Research Center on Aging (INRCA), Via della Montagnola 81, 60127 Ancona, Italy  b Division of Geriatrics, Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, 28034 Madrid, Spain  c Department of Medicine for the Elderly, NHS Grampian, AB15 6XS Aberdeen, UK  d Landspitali University Hospital Reykjavik, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland  e Department of Geriatrics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium  f Division of Geriatrics, Department of Medicine, University College Cork, T12 DFK4 Cork, Ireland

# ARTICLEINFO

Article history:  Received 26 June 2017  Accepted 15 July 2017  Available online 21 September 2017

# Keywords:

Falls  Non- pharmacological interventions  Recommendation  Prevention  GRADE  Evidence

# ABSTRACT

Objectives: To develop explicit evidence- based recommendations for non- pharmacological interventions to prevent falls in older subjects using the GRADE approach to rate the quality of evidence and the strength of recommendations.

Methods: A multidisciplinary panel was constituted composed of geriatricians, a research nurse and a clinical epidemiologist. The GRADE approach was used to rate the evidence and to formulate recommendations.

Results: The critical outcomes were fall rate and number of fallers. Forty- five clinical questions and the associated recommendations were formulated for single, multiple and multifactorial non- pharmacological interventions in three different settings (home, care facilities and hospitals). Seven strong recommendations in favour, and one strong recommendation against, were formulated, all of which were supported by moderate- quality evidence. The remaining 37 clinical questions had weak recommendations. A strong recommendation was formulated in favour of exercise, as a single component, in groups and individually, for community- dwelling older people. Tai Chi was strongly recommended for older adults at risk of falling, living at home. Home safety assessment and modification was strongly recommended for older adults living at home and at high risk of falling. Multifactorial interventions were strongly recommended for older adults, at high risk of falling, living at home and, in older adults in care facilities and hospitals, while knowledge/education alone was strongly recommended against for older people at home.

Conclusions: Based on a systematic review of the evidence, 45 recommendations were formulated regarding non- pharmacological interventions to prevent falls in older adults living at home, in care facilities and in hospitals.

$\mathfrak{E}$  2017 Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

# 1. Introduction

Falls are common events in old age, as one out of three older people fall at least once in a year [1]. Furthermore, the tendency of older adults to fall rises steeply with age [2,3]. Fall- associated injuries also rise with age, with an elevated risk of fracture, particularly of the hip, wrist, pelvis, proximal humerus, ankle, and elbow [4]. Falls are also a leading cause of death in older people [5] Besides injuries, and independent of, falling can also lead to fear of falling, which can engender avoidance or restrictions in daily activities, loss of autonomy, diminished social activity, more falling, depression and decline in quality of life [6,7]. Fall risk factors include a history of falls, gait problems, use of a walking aid, dizziness, muscle weakness [8], several drugs [9] and polypharmacy [10]. In view of the high burden of falls, a number of studies have evaluated fall prevention programs targeting different risk factors have been performed with older people in different settings (living at home, in care facilities [e.g., long- term, residential,

nursing homes] and in hospitals [acute and sub- acute wards]) and have comprised single, multiple and multifactorial interventions, according to the Prevention of fall network earth (ProFaNE) taxonomy [11,12].

The aim of the current article was to develop clinical recommendations for non- pharmacological interventions to prevent falls in older adults based on published evidence that was gathered in a systematic overview of reviews [13].

# 2. Material and methods

This study is part of the Optimal evidence- based non- drug therapies in older people (ONTOP) project, which is a work package of a large European Union funded FP7 research project called Software engine for the assessment & optimization of drug and non- drug therapy in older persons (SENATOR) [14,15]. The aim of the ONTOP project is to provide recommendations by applying GRADE [16] to the best available evidence from primary trials identified through the systematic reviews, concerning non- pharmacological interventions useful to prevent and/or treat common geriatric conditions [13,17- 27].

The method used to identify the evidence is reported in detail elsewhere [13,14].

The evidence expert group identified a list of relevant outcomes and submitted the list to a larger group of experts, in order to formulate appropriate clinical questions, according to the GRADE criteria [16]. Following two rounds of consultations, the panel decided that the critical outcome was falls (fall rate and number of fallers).

The types of interventions were categorized according to the ProFaNE taxonomy [11,12] as (a) single (b) multiple and (c) multifactorial. A clinical question was generated for each single component intervention identified from the evidence.

The primary RCTs were identified from the included systematic reviews from our previous report [13].

GRADE is a systematic, standardized method to evaluate the quality of evidence. The quality assessment is based on risk of bias of the study (including allocation concealment, blinding of outcome assessor [28], incomplete outcome data [29,30] and selective outcome reporting [31,32]), the consistency, the directness in the applicability of the evidence, the precision of the treatment effect estimate and publication bias. If there are limitations in any of the aforementioned categories, the quality of the evidence can be downgraded by 1 or 2 levels. The 4 levels of the quality of the evidence, and their corresponding definitions, are shown in Table 1. Moreover, the quality of the evidence among all critical outcomes is evaluated, including both benefits and harms.

For each critical outcome, GRADE evidence profiles were produced which included information on the quality of the evidence and the treatment effect estimate. A summary of findings table was created for each recommendation to record decisions and to ensure that the panel uniformly considered the quality of the evidence and the certainty regarding the balance of benefits versus harms. The strength of a recommendation (strong or weak) was established by the balance between desirable and undesirable effects, and patients' likely values and preferences. A strong recommendation indicates that the desirable effects of adherence to the recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects, whereas a weak recommendation indicates that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects.

# 3. Results

After identifying the critical outcomes, based on the type of intervention (single, multiple or multifactorial) and the setting (community, care facilities or hospital [acute, sub- acute or rehabilitation wards]), 45 clinical questions and the associated recommendations were formulated. In this section, we present only the clinical questions with strong recommendations all supported by moderate- quality evidence (see Appendix 1 for evidence profile and references of primary studies). The remaining 37 clinical questions with weak recommendations, and the supporting evidence, are shown in a summary table (Appendix 1).

# 4. Community-dwelling older adults

4.1. Clinical question 1: should group exercise be recommended to reduce falls in older people living in the community?

Twenty- six RCTs (7846 participants) tested the effect of multiple categories of group exercise, as a single intervention, on falls in older people living in the community [33]. A meta- analysis of sixteen RCTs (3622 participants) that investigated group exercise, comprising a combination of two or more categories of exercise, revealed a statistically significant decrease in the rate of falls with an estimated Rate Ratio (RaR) of 0.71, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.63- 0.82), but moderate heterogeneity  $\left(I^2 = 48\% , P = 0.03\right)$ . Pooling twenty- two RCTs (5333 participants) that also examined the number of fallers, demonstrated a statistically significant reduction (Risk Ratio [RR] of 0.85, 95% CI 0.76- 0.96) with moderate heterogeneity  $\left(I^2 = 50\% , P = 0.004\right)$ . A sensitivity analysis, to investigate the cause(s) of the heterogeneity, performed by separating RCTs with high versus low fall risk of subjects at recruitment (history of falling, functional impairment or multiple risk factors) only revealed, in the case of trials with high fall risk subjects, that the level of heterogeneity vanished, leaving unaltered, the RR of the number of fallers [33].

The trials had limitations due to the risk of bias in various categories, which led to downgrading the quality of evidence by one level due to risk of bias. A sensitivity analysis based on removal of two studies. Means et al. [34] used a balance rehabilitation intervention involving active stretching, postural control, endurance walking, and repetitive muscle co- ordination exercises without including muscle strengthening exercises; Luukinen et al. [35] studied a population of very old (mean 88 years) and fragile subjects (difficulty with at least 1 ADL) generated a similar fall rate (RaR 0.74, 95% CI 0.66- 0.82) and a much lower heterogeneity  $\left(I^2 = 6\% , P = 0.39\right)$ . Hence, no downgrading for inconsistency was performed for rate of falls. The removal of

Table 1 Quality of evidence and definitions.  

<table><tr><td>Quality of Evidence</td><td>Definition</td></tr><tr><td>High</td><td>We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimated effect</td></tr><tr><td>Moderate</td><td>We are moderately confident in the effect estimate. The true effect is likely to be close to the estimated effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different</td></tr><tr><td>Low</td><td>Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited. The true effect may be substantially different from the estimated effect</td></tr><tr><td>Very low</td><td>We have very little confidence in the effect estimate. The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimated effect</td></tr></table>

these two studies the analysis of the number of fallers, did not produce any change in the effect.

Recommendation 1: in community- dwelling older subjects  $\geq 65$  years old), with high and low falling risk, we recommend multiple component group- based exercise to reduce both fall rate and number of fallers (strong recommendation, moderate- quality evidence).

# 4.2. Clinical question 2: should individual home-based exercise be recommended to decrease falls in older people living in the community?

Eight randomized trials (1073 participants) tested the effect of exercise individually at home, as a single intervention, on falls of older people living in the community. A meta- analysis [33] of seven RCTs (951 participants) that examined individual homebased exercises, composed of multiple categories of exercise, revealed there was a statistically significant decline in rate of falls (RaR 0.68,  $95\%$  CI 0.58- 0.80  $[\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\% ]$  .Pooling the 6 RCTs (714 participants) that examined the same intervention on the number of fallers also demonstrated a reduction (RR 0.78,  $95\%$  CI  $0.64 - 0.94[\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\% ]$  [33].

The studies suffered from a significant risk in several categories of bias lead us to downgrade the quality of evidence by one level.

Recommendation 2: in community- dwelling older subjects  $\geq 65$  years old), we recommend multiple component individual home- based exercise to reduce both fall rate and number of fallers (strong recommendation, moderate- quality evidence).

# 4.3. Clinical question 3: should Tai Chi be recommended to reduce falls in older people living in the community?

Two recent systematic reviews were published after our systematic search updated the evidence regarding the effectiveness of Tai Chi for the prevention of falls in older subjects. The results from these reviews replaced our previous body of evidence. The first review identified 18 trials with 3824 participants and found that Tai Chi was associated with significantly lower chance of falling at least once (RR 0.80,  $95\%$  CI 0.72 to 0.88) and lower rate of falls (incidence rate ratio 0.69,  $95\%$  CI 0.60 to 0.80) compared to the control group [36]. The search strategy in the second review [37] was conducted three years earlier with respect to Huang's review and all the 10 trials identified were contemplated in Huang's review. Nonetheless, the review reported results that were in favour to Tai Chi exercise [37].

Recommendation 3: in community- dwelling older subjects  $\geq 65$  years old), we recommend Tai Chi to lower both fall rate and the number of fallers in people at risk of falling (strong recommendation, moderate- quality evidence).

# 4.4. Clinical question 4: should home safety assessment and modification be recommended to reduce falls in older people living in the community?

Nine randomized trials (4583 participants) tested the effect of home safety assessment and modification, on falls in older people living in the community. Pooling six trials (4208 participants) in a meta- analysis [33], led to a statistically significant decline in fall rate  $\mathrm{RaR}0.81$ $95\%$  CI 0.68- 0.97), but with substantial heterogeneity  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 64\%$ $P = 0.02$  .The same intervention also led to a decrease in the number of fallers (RR 0.81,  $95\%$  CI 0.80- 0.96;  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  7 RCTs,4051 participants).

The significant level of heterogeneity was investigated in two sensitivity analyses [33]. First, RCTs were divided by high versus low fall risk of subjects at recruitment (history of falling or functional impairment). The heterogeneity vanished, but the intervention had a statistically significant effect on fall rate and the number of fallers only in trials with participants that were selected for high fall risk, although the estimated effect of the intervention on the number of fallers, for the high fall risk trials, was almost at the limit of statistical significance (trials with high fall risk subjects RaR 0.62,  $95\%$  CI 0.50- 0.77  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  RR 0.85,  $95\%$  CI 0.75- 0.97  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  [38- 40]; trials with low fall risk subjects RaR 0.94,  $95\%$  0.84- 1.05  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  RR 0.90,  $95\%$  CI 0.80- 1.00  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  [41- 44]).

Second, studies were divided by whether an occupational therapist (OT) or other personnel performed the intervention. Home safety interventions administered by an OT (4 trials, 1443 participants) were associated with a statistically significant decrease in fall rate and a trend towards moderate heterogeneity (RaR 0.69,  $95\%$  CI 0.55- 0.86  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 58\%$ $P = 0.07$  [38,40,41,45]. There was also a decline in the number of fallers (RR 0.79,  $95\%$  CI 0.70- 0.91  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  ; 5 trials, 1153 participants). In the 4 trials when the intervention was not delivered by an OT, there was no statistically significant effect either on fall rate or the number of fallers.

The studies suffered from a significant level of risk in several categories of bias, which led to downgrading the quality of evidence by one level. Based on the results of the sensitivity analyses, the quality of evidence was not downgraded for inconsistency.

Recommendation 4: in community- dwelling older subjects  $\geq 65$  years old) at high risk of falling, we recommend home safety assessment and modification, carried out by an OT, to reduce fall rate (strong recommendation, moderate- quality evidence).

# 4.5. Clinical question 5: should knowledge/education interventions be recommended to reduce falls in older people living in the community?

Four randomized trials [33] tested the effect of knowledge/ education, on falls of older people living in the community. Fall prevention education [46] did not lead to a statistically significant decrease in fall rate RaR 0.33  $95\%$  CI 0.09 to 1.201 RCT, 45 participants) nor to a decline in the number of people falling (RR 0.88,  $95\%$  CI 0.75 to 1.03  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 0\%$  4 RCTs, 2555 participants) [46- 49].

There was significant level of risk in several categories of bias, which led us to downgrade the quality of evidence by one level.

Recommendation 5: in community- dwelling older subjects  $\geq 65$  years old), we recommend against knowledge/education interventions to reduce falls (strong recommendation, moderatequality evidence).

# 4.6. Clinical question 6: Should tailored multifactorial interventions be recommended to reduce falls in older people living in the community?

These interventions consisted of more than one category. Following an assessment to identify potential fall risk factors, participants received personalized combinations of the interventions. Thirty- seven randomized trials (16,005 participants) tested the effect of customized multifactorial interventions on falls of older people living in the community.

A meta- analysis [33] of nineteen RCTs (9503 participants) that investigated the effect of multifactorial interventions on fall rate, showed a statistically significant reduction (RaR 0.76,  $95\%$  CI 0.67- 0.86), but there was considerable heterogeneity between individual studies  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 85\%$ $P< 0.00001$  ). The same intervention had no effect on the number of fallers (RR 0.93,  $95\%$  CI 0.86- 1.02; 34 RCTs, 13,617 participants).

To examine potential reasons for the substantial heterogeneity, sensitivity analyses were carried out [33]. First, RCTs were

separated by high versus low fall risk of subjects at recruitment (history of falling, functional impairment or multiple risk factors). Multifactorial interventions have a statistically significant effect on fall rate only in trials with participants selected for high fall risk, but the heterogeneity remained elevated in both subgroups (trials with high fall risk subjects RaR 0.77,  $95\%$  CI  $0.66 - 0.90$ $\mathrm{I}^2 = 85\%$ $P< 0.001$  ); trials with low fall risk subjects RaR 0.57,  $95\% 0.23 - 1.38$ $\mathrm{I}^2 = 87\%$ $P = 0.01$  ), while the intervention had no effect on the number of fallers in either group of patients.

Second, trials were divided by assessment and active intervention or assessment and referral/providing information. The intervention was associated with lower fall rate in both subgroups, but the level of heterogeneity remained sizable (assessment and active intervention: RaR 0.74,  $95\%$  CI  $0.61 - 0.89$ $\mathrm{I}^2 = 90\%$ $P< 0.001$  ); assessment and referral/providing information: RaR 0.82,  $95\%$  CI  $0.71 - 0.95$ $\mathrm{I}^2 = 56\%$ $P = 0.02$  ). The intervention was correlated with a reduced number of fallers only in the assessment and active intervention group (with high heterogeneity), although it was near the limit of statistical significance (assessment and active intervention: RR 0.87,  $95\%$  CI  $0.76 - 0.98$ $\mathrm{I}^2 = 77\%$ $P< 0.001$  ); assessment and referral/providing information: RR 1.02,  $95\%$  CI  $0.93 - 1.12$ $\mathrm{I}^2 = 49\%$ $P = 0.008$  ).

In addition, the panel downgraded the quality of evidence by two levels for inconsistency and risk of bias.

Recommendation 6: in community- dwelling older subjects  $(\geq 65$  years old), we recommend personalized multifactorial interventions to decrease fall rate (strong recommendation, low- quality evidence).

# 5. Care facilities

# 5.1. Clinical question 7: should tailored multifactorial interventions be recommended to reduce falls in care facilities?

Eight trials in care facilities studied multifactorial interventions. Seven of these were cluster randomized trials. A meta- analysis of multifactorial interventions (exercises, medication review, management of urinary incontinence, fluid or nutritional therapy, environment/assistive technology, social environment and knowledge) [50] were associated with a non- statistically significant reduction in fall rate (RaR 0.78,  $95\%$  CI 0.59- 1.04  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 84\%$ $P< 0.001$  ); 7 trials, 2876 participants) and the number of people falling (RR 0.89,  $95\%$  CI 0.77- 1.02  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 43\%$ $P = 0.10$  ); 7 trials, 2632 participants).

We investigated the significant level of heterogeneity in a sensitivity analysis. After excluding two studies that did not employ exercise as part of the multifactorial intervention [51,52], the intervention became statistically significant and the heterogeneity for fall rate and for the number of fallers declined, respectively, from 84 to  $4\%$  and from 43 to  $21\%$  fall rate RaR 0.61,  $95\%$  CI 0.52- 0.72  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 4\%$ $P = 0.38$  ); number of fallers RR 0.83,  $95\%$  CI 0.72- 0.95  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 21\%$ $P = 0.28$  ).

The studies suffered from a considerable level of risk in several categories of bias, which led to downgrading the quality of evidence by one level. Based on the results of the sensitivity analysis, the quality of evidence was not downgraded for inconsistency.

Recommendation 7: in older subjects  $(\geq 65$  years old) in care facilities, we recommend multifactorial interventions that employ exercise combined with other approaches (medication review, management of urinary incontinence, fluid or nutritional therapy, environment/assistive technology, social environment and knowledge) to reduce falls (strong recommendation, moderate- quality evidence).

# 6. Hospitals

6.1. Clinical question 8: Should tailored multifactorial interventions be recommended to reduce falls of older people in hospitals?

Multifactorial interventions (exercise, medication review, management of urinary incontinence, fluid or nutritional therapy, environment/assistive technology, social environment, knowledge and ophthalmology referral) were able to reduce fall rate [50] (RaR 0.69,  $95\%$  CI 0.49- 0.96  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 59\%$ $P = 0.06$  ); 4 trials 6478 participants), and the number of fallers (RR 0.71,  $95\%$  CI 0.46- 1.09  $\mathrm{I}^2 = 43\%$ $P = 0.17$  ); 3 trials, 4824 participants), but the latter was not statistically significant.

The studies were exposed to risk of bias in different categories, which led to downgrading the quality of evidence by one level.

Recommendation 8: in older subjects  $(\geq 65$  years old) in hospitals, we recommend multifactorial interventions (exercise, medication review, management of urinary incontinence, fluid or nutritional therapy, environment/assistive technology, social environment, knowledge and ophthalmology referral) to reduce falls (strong recommendation, moderate- quality evidence).

# 7. Discussion

Aging is associated with an increased propensity to fall. Furthermore, older people experience more often adverse outcomes after falling, including both physical consequences, such as injuries and fractures, and psychological consequences, i.e. fear of falling. Falls are an important cause of hospitalization and mortality in the older population, with high human and economic costs. Therefore, the prevention of falls is a major objective in older subjects [53- 56]. Many trials have been conducted to evaluate interventions to prevent falls in older people. Since the literature is vast and heterogeneous, clinicians might have difficulties in appreciating the efficacy of the different interventions and hence to apply them in clinical practice. In order to provide a comprehensive yet synthetic overview of the topic, we carried out a systematic literature search and a thorough evaluation of the available evidence to generate 45 recommendations of non- pharmacological interventions (8 strong recommendations and 37 weak recommendations) to prevent older people from falling, based on transparent evidence.

Strong recommendations in favour were formulated for only three types of ProFaNE interventions, i.e. exercise, home safety assessment and modification, and multifactorial interventions. Exercise, both as a group intervention or individual activity, was a very effective intervention at reducing falls, but not all types of exercise were equally effective in all participant groups and in all settings. The ability of exercise to decrease falls in community- dwelling older people was supported by very solid evidence (multiple RCTs and almost nine thousand participants). Conversely, the same type of intervention did not affect falls in older people in care facilities (multiple RCTs and nearly two thousand subjects) and was only partially effective in older people in hospital rehabilitation wards (one RCT and  $< 100$  subjects). More evidence is needed to determine the impact of exercise, in the latter setting. Among different types of exercise, Tai Chi was recently shown to be effective, not only in older adults with a low risk of falling, living at home, as previously reported [13], but also in high risk older adults given that two recent systematic review published after our systematic search updated the evidence regarding the effectiveness of Tai Chi for the prevention of falls in older subjects [36,37]. The findings from Huang that documented a  $20\%$  reduction in the risk of falling were likely to be overestimated due to publication bias and the risk of bias of some trials. However, the

authors were able to perform sensitivity analyses and the results remained consistent and we decided not to perform any downgrading.

Multifactorial interventions were the only intervention to reduce falls, and for which strong recommendations were formulated in all three settings. In community- dwelling older adults, this category of intervention was effective in individuals with high falling risk and when actively administered. In care facilities, exercise must be a component in order for this approach to work, while in hospitals daily fall rate declined. Falling is a geriatric syndrome whose aetiology is often multifactorial. Thus, risk factors for falling, including a history of falls, gait problems, use of a walking aid, dizziness, muscle weakness, drugs increasing the risk of fall as well as polypharmacy, are often associated in older subjects. Hence, it is not surprising that a multifaceted approach that targets those elements can diminish falls in older people.

A strong recommendation was generated against knowledge/ education, as a single intervention, in community- dwelling older adults. Increasing fall prevention knowledge in older people is likely insufficient to reduce falls, since fall risk factors are not influenced.

Home safety assessment and modification reduced falls only in subjects with high falling risk (i.e., those with a history of falling or  $>1$  risk factor) and when administered by an OT. This intervention is a fairly simple way to prevent falls in a vulnerable older population, compared to modifying multimorbidity or polypharmacy, which are much more difficult risk factors to target. Furthermore, given the specific expertise of OTs to deal with this type of older population, it is not surprising that this intervention is effective when carried out by a qualified professional. The implementation of this intervention might be problematic in some healthcare systems, where there are very few occupational therapists available [57,58].

Even though the data supporting the clinical questions were derived from RCTs, which is the most rigorous design of experimental clinical studies, and is assigned a high quality of evidence by GRADE, the majority of the trials were subject to some risk of bias and/or imprecision. It should be noted that one of the risk of bias components, performance bias, where the participants and/or the personnel are aware of the treatment, is unavoidable in non- pharmacological interventions to prevent falls in older adults. These shortcomings led to downgrading the evidence to moderate quality or low/very low quality. Another weak point was that often the evidence supporting the various clinical questions was based on RCTs that lacked statistical power, due to an insufficient number of participants or in the case of cluster randomization, an inadequate number of groups, to detect a significant effect of the interventions on falls.

By furnishing a systematic and transparent approach to identifying populations and outcomes, providing a definition for the quality of evidence and evaluating the evidence based on factors that reduce or enhance the quality, GRADE allows readers to evaluate the evidence. Moreover, to generate recommendations, GRADE takes into account the effect estimates for desirable and undesirable outcomes, confidence in the effect estimates and appraisal of values and preferences.

Relative to other guidelines for fall prevention interventions [55], our recommendations provided a more systematic and transparent way to evaluate the evidence and explicitly presented how the panel regarded the domains when examining the direction and strength of recommendations.

# 7.1. Limitations

The principal limitation is that no cost- effectiveness assessment was carried out.

# 8. Conclusions

The present paper provides transparent, evidence- based recommendations to prevent falls in older people. The ONTOP panel agreed on critical outcomes and furnished strong recommendations for exercise in community- dwelling older adults and multifactorial interventions in older people living at home, in care facilities and in hospitals, to prevent falls.

# Funding

This work was supported by the European Union Seventh Framework program (FP7/2007- 2013) under grant agreement  $\mathrm{n}^{\circ}305930$  (SENATOR; http://www.senator- project.eu/) and by the ICT PSP (Policy Support Program) as part of the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Program of the EU under grant agreement  $\mathrm{n}^{\circ}325087$  (ProFouND; http://profound.eu.com/). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

# Ethical statement

I hereby declare the work did not require ethical approval as it did not involve humans.

# Disclosure of interest

The authors declare that they have no competing interest.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eurger.2017.07.013.

# References

[1] Tinetti ME, Speechley M, Ginter SF. Risk factors for falls among elderly persons living in the community. N Engl J Med 1988;319(26):1701- 7. [2] Peel NM. Epidemiology of falls in older age. Can J Aging 2011;30(1):7- 19. [3] Rubenstein LZ. Falls in older people: epidemiology, risk factors and strategies for prevention. Age Ageing 2006;35(Suppl. 2):ii37- 41. [4] Ensrud KE. Epidemiology of fracture risk with advancing age. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2013;68(10):1236- 42. [5] Stevens JA, Rudd RA. Circumstances and contributing causes of fall deaths among persons aged 65 and older: United States, 2010. J Am Geriatr Soc 2014;62(3):470- 5. [6] Delbaere K, et al. Determinants of disparities between perceived and physiological risk of falling among elderly people: cohort study. BMJ 2010;341: c4165. [7] Legters K. Fear of falling. Phys Ther 2002;82(3):264- 72. [8] Moreland JD, et al. Muscle weakness and falls in older adults: a systematic review and meta- analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc 2004;52(7):1121- 9. [9] Deandrea S, et al. Risk factors for falls in community- dwelling older people: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Epidemiology 2010;21(5):658- 68. [10] Fried TR, et al. Health outcomes associated with polypharmacy in community- dwelling older adults: a systematic review. J Am Geriatr Soc 2014;62(12): 2261- 72. [11] Lamb SE, et al. Reporting of complex interventions in clinical trials: development of a taxonomy to classify and describe fall- prevention interventions. Trials 2011;12:125. [12] Lamb SE, Hauer K, Becker C. Manual for the fall prevention classification system; 2007. [13] Rimland JM, et al. Effectiveness of non- pharmacological interventions to prevent falls in older people: a systematic overview. The SENATOR Project ONTOP Series. Plos One 2016;11(8):e0161579. [14] Abraha I, et al. Evidence of and recommendations for non- pharmacological interventions for common geriatric conditions: The SENATOR- ONTOP systematic review protocol. BMJ Open 2015;6(1):e007488. [15] Soiza RL, et al. The SENATOR project: developing and trialling a novel software engine to optimize medications and nonpharmacological therapy in older

people with multimorbidity and polypharmacy. Ther Adv Drug Saf 2017;8(3): 81- 5. [16] Guyatt GH, et al. GRADE guidelines: 2. Framing the question and deciding on important outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64(4):395- 400. [17] Abraha I, et al. Evidence of and recommendations for non- pharmacological interventions for common geriatric conditions. the SENATOR- ONTOP systematic review protocol. BMJ Open 2015;5(1):e007488. [18] Rimland JM, et al. Meta- analysis of multifactorial interventions to prevent falls of older adults in care facilities. J Am Geriatr Soc 2015;63(9):1972- 3. [19] Abraha I, et al. Simulated presence therapy for dementia: a systematic review protocol. BMJ Open 2016;6(5):e011007. [20] Abraha I, et al. Simulated presence therapy for dementia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;4. Cd011882. [21] Abraha I, et al. Non- pharmacological interventions to prevent or treat delirium in older patients: clinical practice recommendations The SENATOR- ONTOP Series. J Nutr Health Aging 2016;20(9):927- 36. [22] Abraha I, et al. Systematic review of systematic reviews of non- pharmacological interventions to treat behavioural disturbances in older patients with dementia. The SENATOR- OnTop series. BMJ Open 2017;7(3):e012759. [23] Abraha I, et al. Efficacy of non- pharmacological interventions to prevent and treat delirium in older patients: a systematic overview. The SENATOR project ONTOP Series. Plos One 2015;10(6):e0123090. [24] Lozano- Montoya I, et al. Nonpharmacological interventions to treat physical frailty and sarcopenia in older patients: a systematic overview - the SENATOR Project ONTOP Series. Clin Interv Aging 2017;12:721- 40. [25] Lozano- Montoya I, et al. Nonpharmacologic Interventions to Prevent Pressure Ulcers in Older Patients: An Overview of Systematic Reviews (The Software Engine for the Assessor and optimization of drug and non- drug Therapy in Older peRsons [SENATOR] Definition of Optimal Evidence- Based Non- drug Therapies in Older People [ONTOP] Series). J Am Med Dir Assoc 2016;17(4). 370. e1- 10. [26] Velez- Diaz- Pallares M, et al. Nonpharmacologic interventions to heal pressure ulcers in older patients: an overview of systematic reviews (the SENATOR- ONTOP Series). J Am Med Dir Assoc 2015;16(6):448- 69. [27] Velez- Diaz- Pallares M, et al. Non- pharmacological interventions to prevent or treat pressure ulcers in older patients: clinical practice recommendations. The SENATOR- ONTOP series. Eur Geriatr Med 2016;7(2):142- 8. [28] Savovic J, et al. Influence of reported study design characteristics on intervention effect estimates from randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med 2012;157(6):429- 38. [29] Abraha I, et al. Deviation from intention to treat analysis in randomised trials and treatment effect estimates: meta- epidemiological study. BMJ 2015;350:h2445. [30] Abraha I et al. A systematic review found that deviations from intention- to- treat are common in randomized trials and systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol 2017;84:37- 46. [31] Chan AW, et al. Empirical evidence for selective reporting of outcomes in randomized trials: comparison of protocols to published articles. JAMA 2004;291(20):2457- 65. [32] Macura A, et al. Selective outcome reporting: telling and detecting true lies. The state of the science. Intern Emerg Med 2010;5(2):151- 5. [33] Gillespie LD, et al. Interventions for preventing falls in older people living in the community. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;9). CD007146. [34] Means KM, Rodell DE, O'Sullivan PS. Balance, mobility, and falls among community- dwelling elderly persons: effects of a rehabilitation exercise program. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2005;84(4):238- 50. [35] Luukinen H, et al. Pragmatic exercise- oriented prevention of falls among the elderly: a population- based, randomized, controlled trial. Prev Med 2007; 44(3):265- 71.

[36] Huang Z- G, et al. Systematic review and meta- analysis. Tai Chi for preventing falls in older adults. BMJ Open 2017;7(2):e013661. [37] Hu Y- N, et al. Effect of Tai Chi exercise on fall prevention in older adults: systematic review and meta- analysis of randomized controlled trials. Int J Gerontol 2016;10(3):131- 6. [38] Campbell AJ, et al. Randomised controlled trial of prevention of falls in people aged > or =75 with severe visual impairment: the VIP trial. BMJ 2005; 331(7520):817. [39] Pardessus V, et al. Benefits of home visits for falls and autonomy in the elderly: a randomized trial study. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2002;81(4): 247- 52. [40] Pighills AC, et al. Environmental assessment and modification to prevent falls in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc 2011;50(1):126- 33. [41] Cumming RG, et al. Home visits by an occupational therapist for assessment and modification of environmental hazards: a randomized trial of falls prevention. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999;47(12):1397- 402. [42] Day L, et al. Randomised factorial trial of falls prevention among older people living in their own homes. BMJ 2002;325(7356):128. [43] Lannin NA, et al. Feasibility and results of a randomised pilot- study of pre- discharge occupational therapy home visits. BMC Health Serv Res 2007;7:42. [44] Stevens M, et al. Preventing falls in older people: outcome evaluation of a randomized controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2001;49(11):1448- 55. [45] Nikolaus T, Bach M. Preventing falls in community- dwelling frail older people using a home intervention team (HIT): results from the randomized Falls- HIT trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2003;51(3):300- 5. [46] Ryan JW, Spellbring AM. Implementing strategies to decrease risk of falls in older women. J Gerontol Nurs 1996;22(12):25- 31. [47] Dapp U, et al. A randomized trial of effects of health risk appraisal combined with group sessions or home visits on preventive behaviors in older adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2011;66(5):591- 8. [48] Huang HC, et al. Community- based interventions to reduce falls among older adults in Taiwan - long time follow- up randomised controlled study. J Clin Nurs 2010;19(7- 8):959- 68. [49] Robson E, et al. Steady As You Go (SAYGO): A Falls- Prevention Program for Seniors Living in the Community. Can J Aging 2003;22(02):207- 16. [50] Cameron ID, et al. Interventions for preventing falls in older people in care facilities and hospitals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12. CD005465. [51] Kresse N, et al. Fall prevention in residential care: a cluster, randomized, controlled trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2004;53(4):524- 31. [52] Rubenstein LZ, et al. The value of assessing falls in an elderly population. A randomized clinical trial. Ann Intern Med 1990;113(4):308- 16. [53] Zai H. Need for the comprehensive and multidisciplinary management of falls. Eur Geriatr Med 2016;7(6):499- 500. [54] Gilbert T, et al. Management of falls: France, the Netherlands, Poland. Eur Geriatr Med 2012;3(4):246- 53. [55] Blain H, et al. A comprehensive fracture prevention strategy in older adults: the European union geriatric medicine society (EUGMS) statement. Eur Geriatr Med 2016;7(6):519- 25. [56] Gutierrez Robledo LM. Prevention of falls and their consequences. Eur Geriatr Med 2016;7(6):501- 2. [57] COTEC. Summary of the occupational therapy profession in Europe. 2016 [cited 2016 April 19th, 2017]; Available from: http://www.coteceurope.eu/wp- content/uploads/2015/07/2016- COTEC- Summary- of- the- OT- profession- in- Europe.pdf. [58] COTEC, Council of Occupational therapists for the European countries. http://224467. webhosting3.1blu.de/web/StatPlanet.html [date accessed: 19/04/2017].